THE PURPOSE OF MONSTERS
In Draw Steel, you will face monsters. Each goblin, human, or zombie you encounter has the potential to become a monster that the heroes must overcome. This book provides you with tools to use in these moments, as well as opportunities to explore who these creatures are before and after coming to blows.
EVERY GOBLIN HAS A STORY

In Draw Steel, the relationship between hero and monster is a contextual one. Before and after conflict, a monster is another character in the story. Their status doesn't rely on whether a creature who regularly acts as a hero is nearby.
Therefore, the monster stat block represents a moment in time. It is an imperfect translation of a creature while they act as a monster in opposition to a hero. While the hero players have to keep track of a character sheet for the entirety of the game, the Director player uses a monster stat block solely while running combat. Including every detail about each creature they need to control in conflict with the heroes can and will slow the game down.
The game asks you to imagine these creatures more complexly than the damage they deal to each other. Hero players have access to abilities, skills, and motivations that don't involve fighting monsters, and the same is true for all creatures. Most creatures in this book have a language, a culture, and some multifaceted relationship to the world they exist in. They can share the same careers, upbringings, and complications that the heroes can. They can even become allies to the heroes, adventuring alongside them as retainers or in contest with them as rivals.
Directors can utilize their own character sheets that detail important creature's motivations, skills, and features in addition to their stat block. This can be a useful reference for keeping a character consistent across adventuring tests and negotiations, especially for enduring villains.
WHEN CREATURES BECOME MONSTERS	
A monster imposes their will on the world at the expense of someone else. They take control of the land, summon a terrible force to destroy it, or simply bring harm to someone weaker than them.
However, a creature driven by instinct that hunts for food is not a monster unless they hunt outside their needs or their territory. Without malice or cruel ambitions that can be opposed, they are no different from a force of nature.
Therefore, a creature becomes a monster when their malice meets opposition. This often boils down to the monster fights the hero over the fate of someone else. The game utilizes each monster in a way that challenges the hero players to use their abilities and overcome their will.
WHEN MONSTERS BECOME VILLAINS

If a creature is always a monster, then they are a villain. Every aspect of a villain's values and worldview is imposed upon someone else, to the point where a villain's very existence is always in direct opposition to a hero.

Villains tend to have more personal relationships to heroes. There are universal or moral reasons for heroes and monsters to come to blows with one another, such as "hurting people is wrong" or "that doesn't belong to you." But only a villain can take something important from a hero, stand for everything that they oppose, or reflect the hero's worldview in a way that leaves the world worse off.
Usually, villains last much longer than their Stamina would imply. It's not enough to oppose a villain with might; the hero needs justice! Their will needs to be deconstructed and proven wrong before the villain is defeated in a way that is cathartic to the hero and satisfying for all players.
The stat block only represents the creature in battle. If the villain is reduced to 0 Stamina in combat but their main conflict with the heroes is not resolved, then they have only lost the battle instead of the war. They can make their retreat, lick their wounds, and try again later. Or if death is inevitable and their will is strong enough, they can haunt the hero as a revenant until one side finally relents.
COMING TO THE TABLE	
Each person who plays Draw Steel will have a different impression of monsters based on their own experience. In the real world, "monster" has come to mean other, or that which is not us. The monster is an unknowable threat until it is either known or no more. Often, "monster" describes ferocious beasts that can't be prevented from doing us harm. Horrifyingly more often, "monster" is used as a label for groups of people and whole cultures, usually as a means of denying their humanity.
Meanwhile in games, "monster" is a clinical term for an opposing force. The monster is the away team. It describes game actors that challenge the player's ability to achieve their goal. The monster has traits and actions that the player must overcome using their own traits and actions. The monster provides the reason for the player to have those traits and actions in the first place.
It's worthwhile to discuss how each of you would like to engage with Draw Steel ahead of embarking on a new adventure. Because again, you will face monsters, and conflict in the game should be more interesting than disagreements above it.
EVERYONE LOVES ZOMBIES	
There are going to be groups of players for whom imagining monsters beyond their game definition isn't fun and requires too much effort to be satisfying. Draw Steel comes with an assortment of zombies, undead, demons, and now war dogs that can be fought with impunity. There will always be a need for heroes to rise up and protect innocent people from these monsters, and it is no less heroic than overcoming a complex monster.

MONSTER BASICS
To use this book, you'll also want to review the information found in Heroes. If you read that first, most of the information presented in a creature's stat block is self- explanatory, and matches the statistics of hero player characters. However, a few differences are worth noting.
(Playtest note: Right now, creatures are color coded, but this won't be the only way we indicate different features. Icons are coming too. What are presented in this packet are temporary playtest stat blocks until we get real layout.)

LANGUAGES	
If a creature knows at least one language, their stat block has a Languages entry that shows the languages they know. Creatures who don't know any languages don't have this entry.
KEYWORDS

Each creature has one or more keywords. These keywords don't necessarily mean anything on their own, but special rules might apply to them. For instance, a creature with the Goblin keyword benefits from and can contribute to goblin Malice features.
GENERAL KEYWORDS
While many keywords are specific to a group of creatures, like Gnoll or Human, there are also keywords that are found across different monster groups.
* Abyssal: Abyssal creatures, like demons and gnolls, can trace their origins back to the Abyssal Wasteland-a chaotic manifold where the natives hunger for the souls of mortal creatures.
* Accursed: Accursed creatures, like medusas and werewolves, are under the effect of a powerful supernatural curse that changes their very nature.
* Animal: This is an easy one! Animals are bears, wolves, and really big spiders! Aside from the animals of the real world, creatures with a similar level of sapience and who are part of the natural world have the Animal keyword. Animals have only natural defenses.
* Beast: Beasts are creatures with animal-level sapience who have supernatural abilities or traits. Basilisks and chimeras are examples of beasts-they don't have a society, but one has eye beams that can turn you into a statue and the other has three heads, each normally found on a different species and one of which breathes fire!
* Construct: Construct creatures, like the ashen hoarder and valok, are manufactured. Magic or psionics play a role in giving these creatures life. Their level of sapience is determined by the will and skill of their creator. Some function entirely on their own while others serve as mindless drones, who only take action if given orders. Unless otherwise noted, these creatures don't need to eat, drink water, sleep, or breathe to survive.
* 
Dragon: Dragons, the giant reptilian creatures with breath weapons, wings, claws, and jaws, aren't the only creatures who get the Dragon keyword. Creatures who are related to dragons, such as draconians, also have this keyword.
* Elemental: If a creature can trace their origin back to Quintessence, the Manifold of Elements, they're an elemental. This includes creatures of raw elemental power, such as the crux of fire, and creatures who merely trace some part of their origin back to the plane, like meteor dragons.
* Fey: Fey creatures can trace their origin back to Arcadia, a manifold of nature and magic-the home of all elves. Creatures from this plane tend to have a natural connection to nature, magic, or both.
* Giant: Giants include ogres, trolls, and, of course, fire, frost, hill, and stone giants. Giants have a similar limb arrangement to humanoid, but they're much larger. Despite their similar appearance, these creatures have no relation to most humanoids (other than the mighty hakaan). Their origins are entirely separate.
* Horror: Horrors creatures, including overminds and voiceless talkers, are creatures who seem unnatural on most worlds, particularly Orden. Everything about them is alien. Most have potent psionic abilities.
* Humanoid: Humanoids, like dwarves and time raiders, are size 1 creatures who have similar limb arrangements and sapience on par with humans. Many humanoids gather in communities and form societies to survive and prosper.
* Infernal: Infernal creatures, like devils and hobgoblins, can trace their origins back to the Seven Cities of Hell- an ordered manifold where the natives make plans to tempt mortals into contracts for their souls.
* Plant: Plant creatures, like the shambling mound, are made of vegetation. Like other creatures (and unlike plant objects), they can move and interact with their environment. They're living plants!
* Swarm: Swarm creatures are actually more than one creature! They're a whole bunch of creatures, like a swarm of spiders, that move and act together as if they were one creature.
* Undead: Undead creatures, like ghosts and zombies, are the reanimated flesh and spirits of creatures who have died. Their level of sapience is determined by the will and skill of the creature who brought them back from the dead. Some function entirely on their own while others mindlessly seek to harm the living if given no instructions from their creator. Unless otherwise noted, these creatures don't need to eat, drink water, sleep, or breathe to survive.

ENCOUNTER VALUE	
Each Director-controlled creature has an encounter value (abbreviated EV) that is used in building encounters. See Encounter Building for more information.
CREATURE FREE STRIKES

When a Director-controlled creature makes a free strike, they don't roll. Instead, their stat block features a Free Strike stat representing the amount of damage they deal with a melee free strike with a distance of melee 1 or the creature's signature action, whichever is higher. This is also

the amount of damage they deal with a ranged free strike with a distance equal to 5 or the range of the creature's signature action, whichever is higher. A creature's free strike has the Strike keyword and any of the following words found in their signature action: Magic, Psionic, or Weapon. Additionally, if the creature's signature action deals damage with a type, the free strike also uses that type. If the creature's signature action deals more than one type of damage, the Director decides which damage type the creature's free strike uses when the attack is made.
Creature free strikes are a static number for two reasons. First, it keeps gameplay fast. You don't have to stop play to roll dice, and there's no chance of a creature rolling a critical hit and bogging things down further when it isn't their turn. Second, by keeping these static values relatively low, heroes are encouraged to take more risks when it really counts, even if that might result in them taking damage from a free strike.
CREATURE OPPORTUNITY ATTACKS
Even though a Director-controlled creature doesn't have to roll when they make a free strike, if they have a bane on attacks against a creature, they still can't make an opportunity attack against them.
SIGNATURE ACTION	
Every creature has a signature action, which is the first action that appears in their stat block.
TRAITS	
Many creatures have traits, which are features that don't require an action, maneuver, or triggered action to activate, such as the goblin monarch's Crafty trait.
MALICE	
Many creatures have abilities and features that require a resource called malice to activate. See Malice for more information.
END EFFECT	
Certain creatures have the ability to take damage in order to end one EoE (end of encounter) effect currently affecting them. The damage the creature takes to end the effect can't be reduced in any way.
VILLAIN ACTIONS	
The solo and leader creatures presented in this book are designed to be fought in climactic battles at the end of an adventure or campaign. Because of this, they get special abilities called villain actions.
A creature with villain actions always has three. Each villain action can be used only once per encounter, and no more than one villain action can be used per round. A creature can use a villain action at the end of any other creature's turn during combat. Villain actions are numbered and intended to be used in a specific order that creates a logical encounter flow and cinematic arc, but you can use them in any order you choose.

The first villain action is an opener, which shows the heroes they're not battling a typical creature. Openers generally deal some damage, summon a lackey or three, buff the leader, debuff the heroes, or move the creature into an advantageous position. They're a taste of what's to come.
The second villain action provides crowd control. It typically activates after the heroes have had a chance to respond once or twice to the villain, move into position, and surround the villain. This second action helps the villain regain the upper hand. Like an opener, this action comes in many flavors, but it's even more powerful than an opener.
The third and final villain action is an ultimate move or "ult"-a showstopper that the villain can use to deal a devastating blow to the heroes before the end of the battle.
If you have more than two creatures with villain actions in an encounter (which should be a rare, if at all occurrence), only one villain action total may be used per round.
MONSTER ORGANIZATIONS	
A level 1 ghoul isn't necessarily as strong as a level 1 orc! Most creature types have an overarching organization that determines the power level and encounter value of the monsters within it. Some organizations prefer to use large amounts of weaker creatures in encounters while others prefer fewer, more formidable threats.
The monster organizations of a creature type are labeled near the front of each type's writeup. Many creature types either have a main organization and a handful of minions, while several creature types are a collection of a few different monster organizations. The following list offers an overview of each organization and suggestions for deploying them within an encounter.
MINION
Minions are weaker enemies who are made to die fast and threaten heroes en masse. A battle with minions is one where the heroes are outnumbered and get the joy of cutting through fields of their enemies. Creatures organized as minions are meant to support other monster organizations and have a special set of rules for doing so.
Minions die quickly! Some may die before they get a chance to act. That's okay! It's why you build encounters with them eight at a time.
See Minions for more information.
BAND
Monster bands are hardier and work in smaller groups than minions, but it still takes multiple of these creatures to effectively threaten a single hero of the same level. A battle against all band creatures has them outnumbering the heroes at a ratio of about two to one. Creatures under the band organization can be especially effective when brought into encounters alongside other monster bands.
Band creatures are more fragile than anything that isn't a minion, so be sure to double or triple up on stat blocks that you think are key to a combat encounter with them. There's a chance that if the heroes win initiative and have a lot of victories, they can kill a key band creature before they get to act. That's why the encounter-building guidelines allow you to have lots of them.

PLATOON
Monster platoons are highly organized and usually self- sufficient armies. Platoons are well-rounded organizations that usually come equipped to handle most combat objectives. A single platoon creature is a decent threat to a hero of the same level, so an encounter consisting entirely of these creatures typically has one per hero. Platoon creatures can often fight alongside minions and a troop or two to round out their ranks.
TROOP
Troops are the functional opposite of minions. A creature under the troop organization is hardy and can usually stand up to two heroes of the same level on their own. Troops also have a high encounter value. They work well when individually supporting other monster organizations, but they can also be effective on their own.
LEADER
A leader is a powerful who buffs their allies and grants them extra actions. They utilize villain actions and can stand toe-to-toe with at least two heroes of the same level all on their own. Typically only one leader appears in a battle at a time alongside minions, band creatures, platoon creatures, and troops.
SOLO
A creature under a solo organization is an encounter all on their own. They have a special set of rules within their stat block. Solos can be deployed, well, solo! They can typically stand toe-to-toe with five heroes of their level.
CREATURE ROLES	
A creature's role describes its function in combat in a general sense. Roles are descriptive, and most don't follow special rules-they simply help you build encounters and use creatures effectively in combat.
AMBUSHER
Ambushers are melee warriors who can slip by beefier heroes to reach squishier targets in the back lines.
ARTILLERY
Artillery creatures fight best from afar, and can use their most powerful abilities at great distance.
BRUTE
Brutes are hardy creatures who have lots of Stamina and deal lots of damage. They have abilities and traits that make them difficult to ignore and hard to get away from, and that let them push enemies around.
CONTROLLER
Controllers are creatures who change the battlefield, often with magic or psionics. They reposition foes and alter terrain to make it more advantageous for their allies.
Controllers are often on the squishier side, so they need some protection!

DEFENDER
Defenders are tough creatures able to take a lot of damage, and who can force enemies to attack them instead of squishier targets. Defenders often act in squads with allies who have lower Stamina, such as controllers and hexers.
HARRIER
Harriers are mobile warriors who make definitive use of hit-and-run tactics. Their traits allow them to make the most of their positioning on the battlefield.
HEXER
Hexers specialize in debuffing enemies with conditions and other effects. They are generally squishy and rely on allies to help defend them.
MOUNT
Mounts are mobile creatures meant to be ridden in combat, and who make their riders even more dangerous.
SUPPORT
Support creatures specialize in aiding their allies, providing buffs, healing, movement, or action options.
CREATURES WHO DEFEND
If a creature takes the Defend action, they can't take additional actions during their turn. Likewise, if a creature has already taken an action on their turn, they aren't able to also take the Defend action. This applies even if the creature is granted an additional action on their turn, unless they are specifically granted an additional Defend action.
CREATURES WHO GRAB
If a creature has an ability or trait that allows them to grab another creature, they can have only one creature grabbed at a time unless their stat block specifies otherwise. If the creature has already grabbed the maximum number of creatures, the ability or trait used to grab can't be used against another target unless the creature releases an already grabbed target.
CREATURES WHO SUMMON
Unless otherwise specified, a creature or object that is summoned to the field by another creature takes their turn immediately after the summoner. Once a summoning ability has been used, it can't be used again until the start of the summoner's next turn.
MALICE
Just as every hero has a Heroic Resource determined by their class, so too do the heroes' foes need their own juice to fuel their strongest threats. Malice is a resource gained by the Director. You use malice to let enemies in the game activate their most powerful abilities and throw surprises at the heroes during combat.

EARNING MALICE	
At the start of combat, you gain malice equal to the average number of Victories per hero. Then at the start of each round of combat, you gain malice equal to the number of heroes in the battle, plus the number of the round of combat that has just begun. For instance, if five heroes with three Victories each are just starting their first round of combat, then you gain 9 malice-3 for the average number of Victories, 5 for the number of heroes, and 1 for it being the first round of combat. At the start of the second round, provided all the heroes are still alive, you gain 7 malice.
Third round: 8 malice, fourth round: 9 malice, and so on.
If a hero dies, they stop generating malice for you in this way. At the end of an encounter, all your malice disappears.
It's up to you if you want to show your players how much malice you have. Some Directors feel the tension of watching malice creep up and can create great drama, while others like to keep the players guessing about what could come next. Do whatever is most fun for your group, and if you're not sure, ask your players what they would prefer!
SPENDING MALICE	
Non-minion monsters can spend malice the way heroes spend their heroic resources, activating and enhancing their abilities. Abilities that make use of malice have the cost noted in a creature's stat block.
Specific types of monsters sometimes have other ways they can spend malice, typically on features that affect an entire group of enemies, actions or maneuvers they can take during their turn, or events that affect the encounter environment. Such features can be found in the "[Creature] Malice" stat block after the creature type's overall write-up.
You won't be able to spend your malice on every single option a given encounter has to offer. It's totally up to you how you deploy malice. You can spend it on smaller, but still impactful, features each round. You can save it up and use it on some very dramatic abilities. You can spend it on the same feature that uses all your malice each round and then forget about it until the next. Do whatever is most fun for you and your players in a given encounter.
MINIONS
What they lack in power, minions make up for in flexibility and controlling the map. Creatures under this monster organization work a little differently from other creatures-they're multiple monsters that function as a single unit under your control.
The knowledge of how minions work isn't a secret and shouldn't be kept from the players. Share the information in this section with them! They'll have a lot more fun battling minions and shaping narrative around taking out multiple foes at once if they understand how the rules work.
ORGANIZED AS SQUADS

Minions with the same name (for instance, "goblin sniper") can be organized into squads of up to eight creatures. All members of a minion squad act together on the same initiative, and can make squad attacks (see Squad Action).

SHARED LOW STAMINA	
Minions have low Stamina and fall quickly in battle. They allow heroes to feel extra heroic, since a hero might kill several minions at once, depending on those minions' level and encounter value!
Each squad of minions shares a Stamina pool, with initial Stamina equal to each individual minion's Stamina multiplied by the number of minions in the squad. For example, goblin spinecleavers each have Stamina 5, so a squad of eight runners has a Stamina pool of 40. Whenever a minion in a squad takes damage, the squad's Stamina pool is reduced by a number equal to the damage taken.
Because minion Stamina is tracked as a pool, minions can't be winded and can't regain Stamina during a battle.
DROPPING ONE MINION
Whenever a minion squad's Stamina pool is reduced by an amount equal to an individual minion's Stamina, one minion dies or otherwise gets taken out of the fight. If a squad of goblin spinecleavers has its Stamina pool reduced to 35, then the minion who took the damage that reduced the pool dies. When the Stamina pool hits 30, 25, 20, 15, 10, 5, and finally 0, another minion in the squad dies. If multiple minions take the damage that results in the pool dropping low enough to kill one minion, the creature who dealt the damage to the minions decides which of those minions dies.
DROPPING MULTIPLE MINIONS
If a single strike reduces a minion squad's Stamina pool by an amount of damage equal to the Stamina of multiple minions, multiple minions are taken out by the damage.
Start with minions who took the damage first. If all those minions are eliminated and there is still more damage to account for, the minions nearest to the ones who were taken out suffer the same fate.
For instance, if one goblin spinecleaver takes 12 damage from a fury's Brutal Slam ability, that runner dies and another nearby spinecleaver also gets taken out. Allow the player to narrate how their hero takes out additional minions killed by a single attack. Maybe each minion is within striking distance of the hero, who makes multiple brutal weapon attacks with a single action. Maybe the body of the original target is hurled into an unfortunate ally.
Maybe additional minions affected by a single attack pass out from fright! Taking out multiple minions is a chance to play up the cinematic part of the game.
DAMAGING MULTIPLE MINIONS
Minion squads are particularly susceptible to damage- dealing area abilities and attacks that target multiple creatures, because the minion squad's Stamina pool takes damage each time an individual minion takes damage. If three goblin minions are hit with a conduit's Lightfall ability that deals 4 holy damage to each target in its area, the minion pool loses 12 Stamina!
PREPPING MINION STAMINA POOLS
When you're preparing a battle with minions, it helps to take a moment and write out the different amounts of damage at which a minion squad suffers a loss of one of

their minions. For instance, a squad of goblin spinecleaver loses a minion when they take a total of 5, 10, 15, 20, 35, 30, 35, and 40 damage. If you do the math before combat starts (or take a quick moment to jot it down during a pause in combat), it'll help things run smoothly.

ACTING TOGETHER	
When minions act, each minion in the squad must use their action in concert. This is because minions have squad attacks that require participation from all minions, requiring all individual attacks to happen at the same time.
Like all creatures, an individual minion-or all the minions in a squad-can elect to take no action on a turn.
MINION ACTION ECONOMY
Minion turns are meant to be short. On their turn, each minion can take only a move action and an action, a move action and a maneuver, or two move actions.
Minions can make opportunity attacks, but they typically don't have bespoke triggered actions, keeping them easy to run.
SQUAD ACTION
Each minion has a signature action that is an attack ability targeting one creature or object. When multiple minions in a squad use their signature action on a turn, make one roll for the whole squad. Each target of their signature action is only affected by one instance of the ability-when two (or three at maximum) of the squad's minions target the same creature or object with their signature action, each additional minion makes a free strike against that target instead. It's usually more effective to have each minion target a different hero.
As an example, a squad of three demon pitlings are attacking a shadow and a conduit with their Spit ability. One pitling targets the shadow while two pitlings target the conduit. The additional pitling targeting the conduit makes a free strike against them. The shadow and the conduit take 4 damage each from the ability, and the conduit takes an additional 2 damage from the free strike.
If a minion squad gets a critical hit with their signature action, then all the minions who participated in using the action can use the action again.
TRACKING SQUADS
If you use multiple squads made up of the same type of minions in an encounter-for instance, two squads of goblin spinecleavers-it's important to make it easy for the players to tell the squads apart. You can use different miniatures for each squad, or give each squad's miniatures an indicator (a colored magnet, ring, sticker, and so forth)

to help you and your players keep track of which minions are part of the same squad as they start moving around on the battlefield. Many online virtual tabletops have tools for adding colors or textures to icons that make tracking different squads easy.
ATTACHED CAPTAIN	
Any non-mount creature who speaks a language a squad of minions can understand can be attached to that squad as a captain. Captains aren't necessarily strategic leaders with brilliant strategies. Sometimes they're just powerful creatures who bully, inspire, or have some supernatural influence that drives other creatures to action.
A squad of minions can only have one captain, and a creature can't be captain to more than one squad of minions.
SEPARATE ACTIONS AND STAMINA
A captain takes their turn at the same time as the members of their squad but isn't limited in their action options as minions are. A captain's Stamina isn't added to a minion squad's Stamina pool and is tracked as for any other creature in combat.
CAPTAIN BENEFITS
While a minion squad has a captain, each minion in the squad gains the With Captain benefits listed on their stat block. Usually, this benefit is either a damage boost, a bonus to speed, or starting the encounter with temporary Stamina.
I AM THE CAPTAIN NOW
If a squad of minions loses their captain, a new allied creature can become that squad's captain at the start of the round (no action required).
ENCOUNTER BUILDING
We're still working on these guidelines, and need to add information about how environment, party composition, and the like affect encounters. But for this playtest, the basics of encounter building are as follows.


STEP 1: CHOOSE ENCOUNTER DIFFICULTY

First, determine how difficult an encounter you want to create based on the following guidelines.
TRIVIAL ENCOUNTERS
Trivial encounters are easier than easy. They present no challenge at all for the heroes, who are guaranteed to survive the battle with their Stamina mostly, if not entirely, untouched. Think 10th-level heroes taking on a small band of typical kobolds. There's no way it ends well for the kobolds. These encounters can be fun to occasionally throw into your game, but for many groups, the novelty disappears quickly, so that too many trivial encounters can feel like a waste of time.
Unless you determine otherwise, trivial encounters don't earn the heroes any Victories.
EASY ENCOUNTERS
Unless the heroes have already depleted most of their Stamina and Recoveries, easy encounters won't threaten their lives. Easy encounters are great for adventures that want to give the heroes a lot of battles between respites, or for when you want the heroes to feel like superheroes while still overcoming a combat challenge that feels as though it's within their pay grade.
An easy encounter is worth 1 Victory.
STANDARD ENCOUNTERS
Standard encounters are the most common for many adventuring groups. These battles deplete some of the heroes' Stamina and Recoveries, especially from melee- focused heroes. Although character death is uncommon in a standard encounter, it isn't impossible, especially if a player makes a poor tactical choice or just finds that the dice are against them.
A standard encounter is worth 1 Victory.
HARD ENCOUNTERS
Hard encounters are typically climactic encounters with leaders and their loyal servants, or some other scenario that puts the heroes' lives in an equal amount of peril. Hard encounters are winnable, but the heroes need to play smart to survive.
A hard encounter is worth 2 Victories.
EXTREME ENCOUNTERS
Extreme encounters feature threats of a level that the heroes aren't likely to survive if they try to fight to the bitter end. Such encounters rarely appear in most campaigns, though if the heroes are 8th level or higher, they can typically survive such encounters-or have a good chance of coming back to life afterward.
If the heroes overcome an extreme encounter, they should be awarded at least 2 Victories.



STEP 2: DETERMINE ENCOUNTER DIFFICULTY

To determine how many creatures and other types of challenges you should have in an encounter, you need to figure out the heroes' encounter strength (abbreviated ES).
To calculate a group's ES, first determine each hero's encounter worth. This starts at a baseline of 4, then you add 2 for each level of the hero. For instance, a 3rd-level hero has an encounter worth of 10 (4 + 2 + 2 +2). Then add the encounter worth of all heroes together, and that's your ES. For instance, a group of five 3rd-level heroes has an ES of 50.



Level1 Hero
or 3 Victories
Two Heroes

Three

Four

Five

Six

Seven

Eight1612182430364248281624324048566431020304050607080412243648607284965142842567084981126163248648096112128718365472901081261448204060801001201401609224466881101321541761024487296120144168192FACTOR IN VICTORIES
Victories make heroes more powerful on their way to the next level. For each 2 Victories the heroes earn, increase the overall ES as if there were another hero in the party. For instance, if a party of 3rd-level heroes has 3 Victories, increase the ES by 21. If they have 6 Victories, increase the ES by 42. Be careful that the larger ES doesn't lead you to using more creatures than recommended in Number of Creatures. It's usually better to use higher cost creatures in an encounter rather than add lots when increasing ES thanks to Victories.
Since you can rarely predict the exact order in which the heroes will face encounters during an adventure, it helps to keep a list of monsters with an EV cost worth roughly the encounter worth of one, two, and three heroes that make sense for the adventure you're running. You can easily drop or swap these creatures into an encounter on the fly.

STEP 3: DETERMINE ENCOUNTER BUDGET	
Once you know your ES and have chosen your encounter difficulty, you can determine your encounter budget as follows:
* Trivial encounters have a budget that is anything less than your ES minus one hero's encounter worth.
* Easy encounters have a budget of anything less than your ES but more than a trivial encounter budget.
* Standard encounters have a budget that is between your ES and your ES plus one hero's encounter worth.
* Hard encounters have a budget greater than a standard encounter but no more than your ES plus three heroes' encounter worth.
* Extreme encounters have a budget that is anything greater than hard.

STEP 4: SPEND ENCOUNTER BUDGET	
You spend your encounter budget to "buy" hostile creatures to take part in your encounter. Each hostile creature costs a number of budget points equal to its encounter value (EV). When choosing creatures, try to choose a variety of roles for a more dynamic combat experience.
CONSIDER CREATURE LEVEL
To ensure an encounter is challenging but not devastating for the players, you want to choose creatures whose level is no more than 2 greater than the heroes' level. For instance, creatures of level 7 and below are appropriate challenges for a party of 5th-level heroes. If the heroes have 6 or more Victories, you can push the upper limit to within 3 levels of the heroes.
Some creatures outside of this level range might fall into your EV budget, but these creatures have the potential to deal devastating damage before a hero gets to do anything about it. That means players could die after relatively few strikes or abilities from such a creature and that the

creature's potencies may be nearly impossible to resist. It won't feel very heroic.
This is really the only indicator that level serves in encounter building. Everything else relies on EV and organization.
MINIONS COME IN GROUPS OF EIGHT
Whenever you spend EV to buy minions for a combat encounter, you buy them eight at a time. There's no point in buying fewer minions than this for an encounter, as they won't be very effective.
NUMBER OF CREATURES
Too many creatures or too many different stat blocks in an encounter can create a big cognitive load for you and turn exciting encounters into slogs.
In general, you don't want more than eight creatures per hero at a time in an encounter. If the encounter has more than three creatures per hero, at least half the creatures in that encounter should be minions.
When it comes to number of stat blocks, you generally don't want to use more than six different kinds of stat blocks in an encounter, though you can probably manage more if you're using a lot of simple minion stat blocks. If you're just starting out as a Director, keep the variety small until you're confident in your ability to run a complex combat encounter.
STAR OF THE SHOW
Sometimes a combat encounter features a creature that you want to stick around for more than a round of combat and leave a lasting impression on the heroes. These are typically the named villains who the heroes face in the climax of an adventure or campaign.
If you want a creature to stick around and leave a lasting impression in a combat encounter, make it a hard encounter and choose a leader or solo creature with an EV that is at least one third of the encounter budget to be the star of the show.
DYNAMIC TERRAIN OBJECTS
The end of this book features dynamic terrain objects. You can spend your EV budget on these objects the same way you do on monsters. Adding one or two to an encounter gives the heroes a challenge to overcome that is something over than another creature. See Dynamic Terrain for more information.
STEP 5: BUILD INITIATIVE GROUPS

Once you have your creatures selected, you'll put them together in initiative groups, with all creatures in the same initiative group acting on the same turn.
Though it's not a hard and fast rule, you can keep the following guideline in mind as you build initiative groups: The total EV of an initiative group should be between the encounter worth of one to two heroes (see Step 2 above). This helps to ensure that each encounter group can hold its own against any hero in the party without overwhelming that character.

It's okay to have one group with a total EV less than that. It's also okay for a group to be worth more than two heroes, as long as that group consists of a single creature or the heroes have racked up a lot of Victories.
HOW MANY INITIATIVE GROUPS?
In a battle without a solo creature, you generally want about as many initiative groups as there are heroes plus or minus two. This gives you a healthy range to play with and makes your turns effective without being overwhelming for the heroes.

QUICK ENCOUNTER BUILDING	
If you want to build an encounter quickly without doing a lot of math, good news! We've got a formula or two you can use to build an encounter quickly after you determine an encounter's difficulty. After going through this process, you can build initiative groups.
STEP 1. PARTY SIZE, LEVEL, AND VICTORIES
What level are the heroes? How many heroes are there? Write down the answers. You'll need that later.
How many Victories do they have (if they have different amounts take the average)? For every two they have, add another hero to the party for the purpose of this method of encounter building.
STEP 2. BUY CREATURES TO FILL HERO SLOTS
Your encounter has a number of hero slots equal to the number of heroes in the party you calculated in step 1.
Here's how many creatures can fill a hero slot
* Eight minions
* Two band creatures
* One platoon creature
* One leader or troop fills two hero slots
* One solo fills five hero slots plus one slot for each level they are higher than the heroes

You'll want to fill hero slots according to encounter difficulty:
* For a trivial encounter, use only creatures of the hero's level or lower and leave at least two slots empty.
* For an easy encounter, use creatures of the hero's level or 1 higher and leave one slot empty.
* For a standard encounter, use creatures of the hero's level or 1 higher. Fill all slots, and you can give yourself

an extra slot to fill if none of the creatures have a level higher than the heroes.
* For a hard encounter, use creatures of the hero's level and up to 2 higher. Fill all slots plus at least another one and up to another three. If all the creatures are higher level than the heroes, don't give yourself more than two extra slots.
* For an extreme encounter, fill all slots with creatures of the heroes level or higher plus another four or more slots.

USING CREATURE ROLES	
Creature roles help you build interesting encounters with varied challenges. While including every role in a combat encounter makes the battle too complicated for most groups, a fight with creatures who are all the same role typically leads to dull, grindy combat-and few players (or Directors) enjoy combat where both sides are just standing still and rolling to hit without anything dynamic or dramatic happening. For instance, an encounter with a controller, two defenders, and two harriers is more interesting and fun than an encounter with five harriers.
AMBUSHER CREATURES
Ambusher creatures can hide, turn invisible, or otherwise find ways to get the drop of their enemies. They typically spend half their turn attacking a hero, and the other half slipping away and hiding. They focus on taking down a single hero, sometimes dragging their target into the place where they hide.
Encounters that include ambushers should have plenty of cover or concealment, giving them places to hide. Adding other creatures-typically brutes, defenders, harriers, minions-keeps other heroes busy while the ambusher focuses on taking down a single target.
ARTILLERY CREATURES
Artillery creatures are great at ranged combat and can damage heroes who typically hang back behind beefier counterparts. Most artillery creatures are weak in melee, so add some brutes, minions, or soldiers for them to hide behind during combat.
On their turn in combat, an artillery creature typically tries to move away from nearby foes and put a brute, defender, or other ally between themself and the threat, then attacks that enemy. If forced into melee, most artillery creatures do whatever they can to get away, including turning their action into a move action to flee further. If no enemies are closing in, artillery creatures move to keep the heroes at the edge of their range and often attack the biggest threat to their allies first.
BRUTE CREATURES
Brute creatures hit hard and have a lot of Stamina. Their damage output can't be ignored, so heroes often focus on taking down brutes instead of other creatures who have fewer hit points or are weaker in melee. Brutes need to get up close to perform their most devastating attacks, so they work best on smaller battlefields. On their turn in combat, brutes move toward the closest group of enemies and attack, preferring to engage multiple foes at once. Brutes

tend to be simpler to run than other creatures, so you can include a lot of them in an encounter.
CONTROLLER CREATURES
With their ability to hamper and move heroes, controllers make a dynamic addition to any battle. They tend to have more complicated actions and traits with unique effects, so most combat encounters shouldn't have more than two controllers.
Many controllers work best when they have brutes, defenders, harriers, and minions protecting them and taking advantage of the effects, they create. Controllers often use their biggest and most powerful effects at the start of an encounter, affecting as many foes as possible. If the controller can't affect multiple characters or use their most powerful feature, they focus on manipulating the battlefield and repositioning so they can use that feature on their next turn.
DEFENDER CREATURES
Defender creatures defend their allies by drawing the heroes' attacks. They make excellent protectors for ambushers, artillery creatures, controllers, leaders, and support creatures. Defenders don't need to stay very close to the creatures they protect-and it's better if they don't. A defender who breaks away from their charge can lock down a threat far from the rest of the fight.
During combat, defenders engage characters who are strong in melee. A defender battles as many foes as they can reach so their allies can freely move. If more than one defender is in a battle, they typically split up, each fighting a different hero.
HARRIER CREATURES
Harrier creatures make battles dynamic. They can move to attack vulnerable heroes who are weaker in melee, then retreat (if they can do so safely) to protect their artillery, controller, leader, and support allies. Since they can outrun and outmaneuver heroes, this forces the heroes to act tactically. Harriers pair well with each other creature role, including other harriers.
HEXER CREATURES
Like controllers, hexers tend to be a little more complicated and squishy. One or two with a lot of protection from allies can make for a fun encounter.
Hexers like to hamper other creatures and target the foes they think are most-likely to succumb to their debuffs. If a hero has a great turn cutting down the hexer's allies, odds are they're the person the hexer wants to stop next time there's a chance.
LEADER AND SUPPORT CREATURES
Leader creatures have villain actions (see Villain Actions) and fight best alongside allies. Support creatures function much like leaders, but they lack villain actions and are less complex.
Leader and support creatures can buff and heal their allies and grant allies extra movement and actions. As long as a leader or support creature stays in the fight, their allies are enhanced. They are most effective when protected by and buffing artillery, brutes, defenders, harriers, and minions.

You typically shouldn't use more than one leader or support creature in an encounter, as their overlapping enhancements can turn a seemingly normal encounter into a fatal one.
Leaders and support creatures remain close to their allies so their features can benefit as many creatures as possible.
MINION CREATURES
As discussed in the Minions section, minions allow you to create cinematic battles where the characters feel heroic as they cut through several foes at a time. Using minions of a level within 2 of the characters' average level also keeps them dangerous and relevant. When minions work together, they can't be ignored, as they deal a lot of damage and can lock down the characters. Minions make decent protectors for ambushers, artillery, controllers, and leaders.
MOUNT CREATURES
Mount creatures are good for carrying other creatures into battle. Mounts of size 2 and smaller are typically meant to carry a single rider into combat, while larger mounts are built to carry more creatures. Adding mounts to combat encounters make the creatures riding them much faster. They pair well with artillery, brutes, controllers, hexers, leaders, and support creatures. You can also use mounts without riders as harriers in combat.
SOLO CREATURES
Solo creatures have villain actions and are an encounter all on their own for a group of four to six heroes. Their villain actions and lair actions allow them to hamper and harm foes outside of the normal turn order. They're encountered alone and fight most effectively in environments with plenty of space to move around and find cover.
Solo creatures use every movement advantage they have, burrowing, climbing, flying, swimming, or teleporting around the battlefield on their turn. They focus on the hero threatening them most, but also position themselves to target as many foes as possible with their area abilities.
CHOOSING A MAP

To get the most out of the rules for movement, difficult terrain, and falling, you should use encounter maps with interesting environmental features. You might have ledges, columns, walls, windows, dynamic terrain objects, and the like for creatures to be thrown into, thrown off of, or thrown through (and use for cover). You'll want most of your battles to take place in environments with plenty of space to move around, avoiding a lot of long corridors that are only 1 square wide.
You don't have to be a master artist to create a great tactical map. You can use hand-drawn shapes and lines on an erasable mat (or virtual tabletop) to represent cliffs, hazards, and more. You can also find incredible maps online. Some are free and others are available for a reasonable price on the websites of great cartographers.
ENCOUNTER OBJECTIVES
You can use objectives to create encounters that are about more than hacking down your foes to get to the last bit of Stamina. The Combat chapter in Heroes gives an overview

of different combat objectives you can set for heroes to achieve during an encounter. While that book gives an overview of what's achievable in each objective so that players know what's expected of them, this book gives more detailed examples that you can use and modify for your games.
The write up of these objectives in this book includes the following details:
* Difficulty Modifier: This tells you how the objective changes the encounter's difficulty. Pay attention to how objectives change the difficulty of an encounter. You might be able to turn up the head a bit!
* Success Condition: This tells you what the heroes must do to win the day. When these conditions are met, the heroes' enemies flee or surrender, or you can also utilize the Dramatic Finish or Event Ending described in the Combat chapter of Heroes.
* Victories: This tells you how many Victories the heroes earn.
* Failure Condition: This tells you when the heroes have failed and the enemies win. If this occurs, the heroes earn no Victories.

Let's get into a more detailed look at each of the objectives from Heroes.
DIMINISH NUMBERS	
The simplest combat encounter objective is "defeat them before they defeat us." While the heroes don't have to kill every last enemy in a Diminish Numbers encounter, they do need to remove their opponents to win the day and get their opponents to a point where they flee or surrender.
DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
This objective doesn't modify the encounter's difficulty.
SUCCESS CONDITION
Choose one of the following success conditions:
* An encounter that includes at least two groups of minions ends when the heroes have no nonminion enemies remaining.
* An encounter with mostly band creatures ends when the heroes outnumber their foes.
* An encounter with most platoon creatures ends when the heroes outnumber their foes two to one.
* The encounter ends when the number of the heroes' remaining foes is half or fewer what it was at the start.
* In a battle against a solo creature, the creature flees or surrenders when reduced to a quarter of their Stamina or less and after using all their villain actions.

VICTORIES
If the heroes achieve success, they gain 1 Victory for an easy or standard encounter, or 2 Victories for a hard or extreme encounter.
FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes gain no Victories if they are killed, captured, flee, or otherwise fail to defeat their foes.



DEFEAT A SPECIFIC FOE	
A Defeat a Specific Foe encounter includes one or more of the heroes' enemies commanding the rest, such as a hobgoblin bloodlord leading a group of mercenaries, or one or more particularly powerful foes among a group of weaker ones, such as a pair of tusker demons in a gnoll war band. Because these enemies are the stars of the encounter, if only weak foes are left once the stars are gone, the battle loses its challenge and it's time to wrap it up. It makes sense that those weaker foes flee or surrender once their biggest advantage has gone down.
DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
If the creature or creatures who need to be taken down for the encounter to end makes up one third or less of the opposing side's total EV, then the encounter is one step of difficulty easier (e.g. from hard to standard).
SUCCESS CONDITION
The heroes win when the designated creature or creatures are reduced to 0 Stamina.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain Victories according to the encounter's difficulty after being adjusted for this objective. They earn 1 Victory for an easy or standard encounter or 2 for a hard encounter.
FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes gain no Victories if they don't defeat all the designated creatures. Note that designated creatures could choose to flee if all their allies start dying.



GET THE THING!	
Classic heroic fantasy is full of important objects that the heroes must protect from the forces of evil: magic rings, royal birth certificates, dragon eggs, and the like. Heroes often find themselves at violent odds with their enemies as they race to collect a valuable or important item from a guarded temple or castle, or when they need to steal the item from a group of enemies already in possession of it. Objectives in this category work well when paired with other objectives, such as Defeat a Specific Foe. For instance, the heroes must steal a ledger containing a record of criminal activity from an overmind and her lackeys.
However, even if they obtain the ledger, the battle won't be over until they also defeat the overmind, who won't let the book go without a fight!
THE THING
The thing the heroes need to get is typically a 1T object. (If the thing is a creature or a bulky object that must be carried past enemies, this might instead be an Escort encounter!) Most or all approach routes to the thing are guarded by enemies, and often a trap or a particularly powerful monster stands guard over the object.
The thing might be fragile (like a document) or virtually unbreakable (like a magic weapon), but in any case, the enemies don't particularly want to harm it. However, in some cases it can be damaged accidentally.
Additionally, a thing can have one of the following extra defenses:
* Hidden: The heroes may need to make one or more successful tests to find the thing, or it may be behind a door or lid that must be opened. It might even be hidden in plain sight. The unassuming sword in an inanimate suit of armor's hand is really the magic sword they need!
* Held: The thing is possessed by an enemy. Perhaps it's in their pocket or, if the thing is a weapon or implement, the enemy might be using it.

DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
If there is no powerful monster (at least one-third or more of the encounter's total EV) or trap directly guarding the thing, the encounter is one step easier. If the thing is hidden or held, the encounter is one stage harder.

SUCCESS CONDITION
The heroes win when all the heroes leave the encounter map with the thing.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain 1 Victory if they leave the map with the thing and the encounter was easy, standard, or hard after being adjusted for this objective. They instead earn 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the encounter's difficulty is Extreme or none of the heroes take damage during the encounter.
FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes gain no Victories if the thing is destroyed or remains in the enemies' hands.
DESTROY THE THING!	
Combat doesn't always have to be about destroying your enemies. Sometimes it's about destroying their stuff!
Burning a pirate captain's vessel, closing a portal to the Abyssal Wasteland before it lets in an army of demons, or shutting down a massive kobold trap made of spinning blades could so hamper the heroes' foes that the battle is no longer worth fighting once the damage is done.
Sometimes the thing is actually multiple things, all of which must be destroyed.
THE THING
A typical thing is an object with Stamina equal to the heroes' level times 20. Most objects have poison and psychic immunity. Additionally, the thing may have immunities or vulnerabilities to one or more damage types, for instance, a magic statue might be immune to fire damage but vulnerable to thunder damage.
Additionally, a thing can have one or more of the following extra defenses:
* Hidden: The heroes may need to make one or more successful tests to find the thing, or it may be behind a door or lid that must be opened. It might even be hidden in plain sight.
* Held: The thing is possessed by an enemy. A thing can't be both hidden and held.
* Sturdy: The thing's Stamina is twice what it was.
* Multiple: There are multiple things, all of which must be destroyed. Divide the thing's stamina between all of them.

DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
If the thing doesn't have any extra defenses, the encounter is one step easier. If the thing has at least two extra defenses, the encounter is one stage harder.
SUCCESS CONDITION
The heroes win when they destroy the thing.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain Victories according to the encounter's difficulty after being adjusted for this objective. They earn 1 Victory for an easy or standard encounter or 2 for a hard encounter.

FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes gain no Victories if the thing is not destroyed and remains in the enemies' hands.
SAVE ANOTHER

No one earns the mantle of hero without saving a few lives. Sometimes the point of an encounter isn't to kill, but to save as many folks as you can.
If the heroes rescue powerful allies from the clutches of their foes during combat, the added strength of those allies might be enough to make the remainder of the encounter trivial. When you and your companions save a griffon from a crew of poachers, the hunters become the ... well, you know the rest.
ALLIES AND POTENTIAL ALLIES
Some Save Another encounters feature willing allies (creatures that are able and willing to fight alongside the heroes), and some feature potential allies (creatures that can't or won't join the heroes right away-but might later in the battle). In combat, willing allies can be controlled by the heroes (and might use retainer stat blocks), while potential allies are controlled by the Director.
During an encounter, potential allies must be won over and freed from captivity before they become allies. This requires success on a hard Presence test made as a maneuver. Potential allies otherwise flee for the nearest exit on their turns.
DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
For each willing ally the heroes can save who is of their level or higher, add one hero to the party for the purposes of building your encounter.
SUCCESS CONDITION
Once all allies are freed and have either joined the fight or retreated off the encounter map, and at least half of the allies lived through the encounter, the heroes win.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition was met and encounter was easy or standard after being adjusted by the objective's difficulty modifier. The heroes gain 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter was hard or extreme or all of the allies were saved and survived.
FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes gain no Victories if half or more of the allies are dead or captured.
ESCORT

Surprising as it may seem, sometimes the fate of the mission doesn't rest on the heroes' shoulders at all! Sometimes it rests on the shoulders of someone standing next to the heroes. The heroes' job is to keep this important person safe as they travel to a specific destination.
Not every Escort encounter is on behalf of a wise or mighty ally. Sometimes the heroes are tasked with protecting a helpless or even an actively troublesome creature, such as a

hapless noble or a wayward child. They might even have to protect a bulky or inconvenient inanimate object. Whatever the case, the enemies just keep coming until the heroes get their charge to their destination.
WARD
The creature or object to be protected is called the ward. At the start of each round, choose a hero. The ward moves on that hero's turn and is controlled by that hero. Most wards can take a move action or a maneuver on their turn, but not both. A ward's characteristics and speed are determined by the Director. Most humanoid wards have a speed of 5.
A sturdy ward, such as an able-bodied citizen, typically has Stamina equal to 10 times the heroes' level. A delicate ward, such as an elderly diplomat or an important object, typically has Stamina equal to 5 times the heroes' level.
DESTINATION
Every Escort encounter has a destination: a place of safety beyond which the enemies won't follow.
Typically, when the encounter begins, the ward's distance from the destination is at least three times the ward's Speed (though they can start closer if difficult terrain or other obstacles complicate the route). The heroes' enemies can be placed anywhere on the encounter map, including between the ward and the destination, but not within 5 squares of the destination.
REINFORCEMENTS
At the start of each round, any minion that was killed during the last round is replaced by a reinforcement. The Director chooses their position, which can't be within 5 squares of the ward, the destination, or any hero.
DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
A combat encounter's difficulty is one stage harder with a delicate ward.
SUCCESS CONDITION
The heroes win when the ward reaches their destination.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met. They earn 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter's difficulty is extreme after being adjusted for this objective or the ward and all heroes reach their destination in fewer than 3 rounds.
FAILURE CONDITION
If the ward is reduced to 0 Stamina or is prevented from reaching their destination, the heroes gain no Victories.
HOLD THEM OFF

Sometimes the heroes just need to buy time. They might need to battle a conquering tyrant's army to allow innocent villagers time to escape. They might need to hold off wave after wave of zombies while a group of priests completes a ritual to lay the undead to rest for good. To achieve this objective, the heroes need to stay alive and protect a particular position for a number of rounds determined by the Director.

DEFENSIVE POSITION
The Director (or the heroes) choose a defensive position, an area that must be held and controlled by the heroes. The fewer of the heroes' enemies that get passed the defensive position, the better their chances of success. The area can be any size. The defensive position blocks entry to a vulnerable area the heroes are defending.
Often, a defensive position grants bonuses to its defenders. The approach to the position might be narrow, over difficult terrain, or require climbing, or anyone inside the position might have the benefit of higher ground against anyone outside it.
ENCOUNTER DURATION
The Director determines the encounter duration, the number of rounds that the heroes must defend the area in order to be successful. A typical encounter duration is 3 rounds.
REINFORCEMENTS
At the end of each round, the Director adds more enemies for the heroes to battle on the map. The new group should have an EV of all the enemies killed during that round plus the EV value of one hero (see Encounter Building). If the Director doesn't spend all of their EV in a round, the remainder can be added to a future round.
Reinforcements appear at least 10 squares from the defensive position.
DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
A Hold Them Off encounter's difficulty is determined by the creatures present for the battle at the beginning of the first round of combat. Don't count reinforcements toward the difficulty. The encounter difficulty is one step harder if the encounter duration is 5 rounds or greater.
SUCCESS CONDITION
The heroes win if they survive for the encounter duration and let fewer creatures through the defensive position than there are heroes.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met. They earn 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter's difficulty is extreme or the heroes hold off the enemy for an encounter duration of 5 rounds or more.
FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes earn now Victories if a number of creatures equal to or greater than their number get passed the defensive position.
ASSAULT THE DEFENSES

The enemy holds a strategically important position and the heroes want it. In a reverse of the Hold Them Off encounter, the heroes seize the enemy's defensive position. The encounter ends when the heroes secure this spot for themselves. Those enemies likely know better than to assault that position on a whim, because they just held it!

Sometimes, and Assault the Defenses encounter is part of a combined objective. First you've got to assault the defenses, then you've got to hold off against counterattack.
DEFENSIVE POSITION
The Director choose a defensive position, an area that must be captured by the heroes. The area can be any size. Not all of the heroes' enemies in the encounter are in this position, as some are outside attempting to stop heroes before they get close.
Often, a defensive position grants bonuses to its defenders. The approach to the position might be narrow, over difficult terrain, or require climbing, or anyone inside the position might have the benefit of higher ground against anyone outside it.
DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
An Assault the Defenses encounter's difficulty is one stage harder if the defensive position grants two or more bonuses to its defenders.
SUCCESS CONDITION
The heroes win when at least one hero and none of their enemies have been in the defensive position for four consecutive turns.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met, or 2 Victories if the success condition is met and encounter's difficulty is hard or extreme after being adjusted by the objective.
FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes only fail if they are unable to achieve the success condition.
STOP THE ACTION	
Sometimes combat is complicated by the fact that the heroes need to stop the villainous actions of their foes. It's not enough to simply defeat the warriors in a cult. The heroes must also stop the zealots' archdevil-summoning ritual! Or it might be that the heroes need to interrupt a wedding and make sure an evil mage doesn't marry the heir to the throne. Despite combat, the mage forces the ceremony to continue! Objectives in this category often have a timer associated with them. If the heroes don't achieve the objective in a certain number of rounds, the conditions of the battle often change. For instance, if the cultists summon the archdevil, defeating the devil suddenly becomes the heroes' new objective!
ENCOUNTER DURATION
The Director determines the encounter duration, the number of rounds before the villains complete their plans. A typical encounter duration is 3 rounds. Sometimes, events can change the encounter duration Succeeding on a hard Reason test to dispute the wedding's legality increases the encounter duration by 1, or allowing zealots to sacrifice an innocent creature as part of their ritual decreases it by 1.

STOPPING THE ACTION
The villain's evil plan has certain requirements, and if those requirements aren't met, the action is stopped and the heroes are victorious. For instance, to complete a ritual, during each round at least one zealot priest might be required to spend an action to further the ritual. A wedding can't be completed if a participant or the officiant is killed or captured.
FAILURE CONSEQUENCES
If the villains' plan succeeds, there may be additional consequences within the encounter. For instance, if the zealots summon a demon, or if a newly-crowned evil mage uses their new royal authority to summon guards, the heroes may face extra enemies. These potential reinforcements aren't counted towards the encounter's difficulty, since they only appear once the heroes have failed the encounter. This is an entirely new battle now!
DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
A Stop the Action encounter's difficulty is one step harder if the encounter duration is 2 or less, and one Step easier if the action can be stopped by killing or removing any single creature.
SUCCESS CONDITION
The heroes win if they stop the action before the encounter duration is up.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met, or 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter's difficulty is extreme or the heroes stop the action before the last round of the encounter duration.
FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes gain no Victories if they fail to stop the action before the end of the encounter duration. The heroes may earn Victories from any new encounters that occur because of a failure consequence.
COMPLETE THE ACTION

The opposite of a Stop the Action encounter, this objective ending sees the characters charged with initiating an event, performing a ritual, and so forth. For instance, if the heroes are attempting to launch an airship while repelling a time raider boarding party, the encounter could be over the moment the heroes manage to activate the vessel and take off with just a few time raiders actually aboard.
ENCOUNTER DURATION
The Director determines the encounter duration, the number of rounds before the heroes can complete their plans. A typical encounter duration is 3 rounds.
TASKS AND FAILURES
During each round, at least half the heroes must spend a maneuver performing a task that advances their plans. Each round, the Director decides what tasks are available and where they must be performed. For instance, to launch an airship, one hero might have to cast off an anchor on

deck while another unfurls a sail at the top of a mast. The list of available tasks may change each turn.
If at the end of a round the heroes have failed to perform the required number of tasks, the party accumulates one failure.
For more difficult encounters, performing a task may require a successful test.
DIFFICULTY MODIFIER
A Complete the Action encounter's difficulty is one step harder if the encounter duration is 5 or more, or if completing tasks requires a successful test. It is one step easier if the encounter duration is 2 or less.
SUCCESS CONDITION
The heroes win if they reach the end of the encounter duration with 1 or 0 failures.
VICTORIES
The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met or 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter's difficulty is extreme after being modified by this objective or the heroes reach the end of the encounter duration with zero failures.
FAILURE CONDITION
The heroes gain no Victories and the can't complete the action if they accumulate 2 or more failures during the encounter duration.
RUNNING ENCOUNTERS
Once you've built a combat encounter, it's time to run it! Here's a few tips to help you run fun and dynamic encounters:
* The monster stat blocks in Draw Steel are designed to be run as they're written. Most of the time if you take the actions and maneuvers in a creature's stat block, they'll be effective.
* If a non-minion creature doesn't have a maneuver in their stat block, remember that they can take the Grab, Hide, and Knockback maneuvers just like the heroes can!
* Keep creatures moving! The heroes will move in response to the monsters moving. If you want a dynamic combat, move your creatures to take advantage of flanking, get out of range of the heroes, and to attack vulnerable targets.
* Spread the damage around. If you've got an encounter with a lot of creatures, it's tempting to focus fire on a single hero. This can be a good tactical move, but it's not always fun for the players. Many heroes have triggered actions they get to use when they take damage, so spreading the damage around is giving them a chance to do a cool thing off turn.
* You can modify creature Stamina as you see fit. Do you really want that foe to live for one more turn? Give them a little extra Stamina! Is combat starting to drag? Look at that, every creature you control now has just 1 Stamina remaining.
* You can also utilize reinforcements. It can be tough to manage a lot of creatures at once on a battlefield, but bringing in new waves of creatures allows you to have a

lot of different stat blocks in an encounter without getting overwhelmed by trying to run all of them at once. Reinforcements can also make an encounter that seems like a cakewalk suddenly much more deadly and raise the stakes!
* You can end combat with a dramatic finish, which lets the heroes get in on the narrative fun, or an event ending.
* If the heroes decide to flee, you can have them escape in a montage test or simply describe them running away to live to fight another day-whatever you think will be the most fun for the players after a defeat.

RESKINNING MONSTERS
Even with a book chock full of monsters, you're likely to wish you had stat blocks for a specific kind of creature that isn't in this book (or another supplement we or a third party puts out). You might need snake people, fish people, or a fifty-story-tall crab. The good news is that you can modify all of the stat blocks in this book to make new creatures with a little work! Here's some tips for reskinning monsters for you:
* You can change any creature's description and still use the numbers in their stat block and create something new. If you want a weretiger instead of a werewolf, odds are just describing the werewolf as a tiger-humanoid hybrid and changing the word "wolf" with "tiger" everywhere it appears will get you what you need without changing much of anything else. If you find the existing creature that is closest to what you want, your job is a lot easier.
* Adding or removing the Climb or Swim keyword to a stat block and giving a creature the ability to breathe underwater doesn't change their level or challenge. You can do these things freely to create new climbing and aquatic variants of different stat blocks. Turn those demonic gnolls into rampaging fishfolk!
* You can swap damage types, immunities, and weaknesses easily. You can make the elemental crux of fire into a crux of acid by changing all the fire damage in the stat block to acid damage.
* The stat blocks in the Animals and Rivals sections are meant to be modified and have rules for creating new animal and humanoid stat blocks. You can use these to create nearly anything that falls into either of those categories (including many fantasy animals).

RETAINERS
A retainer is a type of follower who fights alongside the heroes. A retainer can gain levels just as heroes do, so their battlefield contributions remain relevant as the heroes advance.

Retainers have stat blocks similar to monsters. This book provides more than a dozen retainers. In addition, these rules allow you to create your own retainer using nearly any monster as a base creature. Some retainers, like the human warrior or the time raider mind healer, are members of playable ancestries; others, like the minotaur gorer, are more monstrous in nature.
A retainer is a follower of a specific hero. This hero is called the retainer's mentor, and the hero's player controls that retainer in battle. Each player can control only one retainer at once. If a hero acquires more than one retainer, all but one are considered to be waiting at the party's stronghold or at the periphery of battle, not contributing meaningfully to its outcome.
SIDEKICKS, NOT STARS

Retainers are useful allies, but the heroes are the stars of the show! Retainers are there to pitch in and to make the heroes look good.
Retainers are simpler to run than heroes. They have fewer abilities and fewer resources to manage. Usually, a retainer makes about one power roll per turn and then gets out of the way. But while a retainer's turn is quick, it can be tactically interesting! Often, besides dealing damage, a retainer's abilities allow their mentors to do interesting things on their turn.
GAINING RETAINERS	
In many cases, heroes gain retainers as they acquire character features. For instance, a hero might gain a retainer from a title, a complication, or a similar game element. When a player gains Renown, they may be able to choose a retainer as a new follower.
At other times, the events of the story may dictate that a retainer joins the party. When the heroes rescue a prisoner or befriend a former rival, the Director may decide that the NPC joins the party, becoming a retainer of one of the characters.
Gaining a retainer is always at the Director's discretion. If a rules element grants a specific retainer, the Director can always substitute another that works better for their campaign.
RETAINERS LEAVING THE PARTY

A retainer doesn't always travel with the party; when they're not called on to adventure, they can remain behind at the party's stronghold or otherwise live their own lives. Even when they're not present, they're still considered to be a retainer of the party.
But there might be cases when a retainer does permanently leave. Retainers aren't invulnerable-they can be killed in battle. Retainers can leave under less extreme circumstances as well. If the events of an adventure set a retainer against their former mentor, or if the retainer's story naturally comes to an end, the party and the Director can decide that it's time for the retainer to ride off into the sunset. The players may meet their former adventuring buddy again, perhaps as a friendly NPC or even as a foe!

RETAINERS IN COMBAT	
There are some special rules to keep in mind while using a retainer in combat.
Part of the mentor's turn. The retainer takes their turn as part of their mentor's turn. For the purposes of (EoT) effects or other rules elements that depend on the start or end of a creature's turn, the start of the mentor's turn is considered to be the start of the retainer's turn and the end of the mentor's turn is considered to be the end of the retainer's turn.
If a hero can't act on their turn (for instance they are unconscious), their player can still control their retainer.
Retainer Action Economy. On their turn, the retainer can take only a move action and an action, a move action and a maneuver, or two move actions.
Recoveries. A retainer has 6 Recoveries.
Surges. When a retainer gains surges, they go to their mentor's surge pool, which the retainer shares. The retainer spends surges the same way a hero can, but the extra damage granted to them by surges is equal to their mentor's highest characteristic score.
RETAINER ADVANCEMENT	
Some monsters have the Retainer type next to their level and role: for instance a goblin guide is a level 1 harrier retainer. These retainers can gain levels alongside the party. A lowly level 1 goblin guide can advance up to level 10, provided they adventure with a heroic party for long enough!
A retainer doesn't gain Victories or XP. Instead, a retainer usually has the same level as their mentor. When a character acquires a retainer, the retainer levels up to their mentor's level. Thereafter, each time a mentor gains a level, all of their retainers attain the same level (whether they are currently accompanying the hero or not).
If a character somehow acquires a retainer with a level higher than their own, the retainer doesn't lose levels-but they don't gain any new levels until their mentor's level exceeds their own.
ADVANCEMENT FEATURES

A retainer monster has a stat block much like that of other monsters, which includes characteristics, a level, a role, one or more abilities including a signature action, and other standard monster features. This stat block represents the monster's statistics at their lowest level. The monster's statistics improve as they gain levels, as shown on the Retainer Advancement table.
Depending on a retainer's starting level, they may be able to gain more or fewer levels. A voiceless talker exile, which starts at level 6, can only gain four levels before reaching level 10! If the level listed in a monster's stat block is higher than 1, they don't gain advancement benefits for any levels up to and including their starting level; as a high level monster, similar bonuses are already baked into their statistics.
Retainer Advancement


Leve lAdvancement FeatureStamina Increas eSignatur e Action Damage Increase (Tier 1)Signatur e Action Damage
Increase (Tier 2
and 3)2+1 to one characteristic+10+1+13+2 free strike damage+10+14Level 4 retainer advancement ability or level 4 role advancement ability+10+1+15+1 to all characteristic s+10+16+2 free strike damage+10+1+17Level 7 retainer advancement ability or level 7 role advancement ability+10+18+1 to one characteristic+10+1+19+2 free strike damage+10+110Level 10 retainer advancement ability or level 10 role advancement ability+10+1+1
Characteristic Increase: At level 2, a retainer gains a permanent +1 bonus to one of their characteristics. At level 5, they gain an additional +1 to all their characteristics, and at level 8 they gain an additional +1 to one characteristic.

Free Strike Damage: The damage from the retainer's free strikes increases by +2 at level 3, again at level 6, and again at level 9, to a maximum of +6.
Advancement Abilities: A retainer gains new abilities at levels 4, 7, and 10 (unless the retainer's starting level is that high or higher).
If a monster has the Retainer type, their stat block includes new retainer advancement abilities, specific to that monster, for each level on which they qualify for a new advancement ability.
Whenever a monster would gain a new advancement ability, instead of choosing the retainer ability in their stat block they can choose a role advancement ability that matches the monster's role and level. Advancement abilities for each role are given in the next section.
Stamina Increase: At each level, a retainer's Stamina increases by 10.
Signature Action Damage Increase: A retainer's signature action is unique in that it gets stronger as the retainer advances in level. Only their signature action improves in this way!
Each retainer's advancement chart includes two Signature Action Damage Increase columns: one for a tier 1 power roll and one for a tier 2 or 3 power roll. Whenever the retainer deals damage with their signature action, they deal extra damage equal to their total accrued damage bonuses for the appropriate tier.
Advancement Example: A level 4 hero convinces a goblin guide, a level 1 harrier retainer, to join the party. The goblin guide immediately gains 3 levels. At level 2, the guide adds
+1 to their Agility. At level 3, the guide gains a +2 bonus to free strike damage. At level 4, the guide chooses between the level 4 goblin guide advancement ability, Weaving Knives, or the level 4 support advancement ability, Knock Back.
Additionally, having gained three levels, the guide's Stamina increase by 30, to a total of 60. The damage dealt by their Signature Action increases by +2 (if they get a tier 1 result) or +3 (if they get a tier 2 or 3 result).
ENCOUNTER ABILITIES

Some retainer abilities have the Encounter keyword. Once a retainer uses this ability, they can't use the same ability again until their mentor gains a Victory.
CUSTOM RETAINERS

<The bestiary> includes many prebuilt retainers, but you can turn most monster stat blocks into retainers, provided they're not a minion, a leader, or a boss. The Director has final say over whether any monster can be selected as a retainer.
To build a custom retainer, follow the steps above. A custom retainer has no retainer-specific advancement abilities, so they must take the role advancement ability specific to their level and role.
Advancement Example: A level 4 hero trains a striped condor griffon, a level 2 brute, gaining them as a retainer. The griffon immediately gains 2 levels. Since the griffon

started at level 2, they don't gain any level 2 benefits or advancement features. At level 3, the griffon gains a +2 bonus to free strike damage, their Stamina increases by 10 (from 80 to 90), and their Signature Action damage increases by 1 for tier 2 and 3 attacks. At level 4, the griffon gains the level 4 brute ability Big Windup, an extra 10 Stamina (from 90 to 100), and an extra +1 Signature Action damage bonus for all tiers, for a total Signature Action damage increase of 1 (for tier 1) and 2 (for tier 2 and 3).
ROLE ABILITIES	
When a retainer reaches level 4, 7, or 10, they can choose to learn one of the following role abilities. A retainer only qualifies for the role ability that matches their role and level.
Some role abilities have the magic or psionic keyword. Depending on the nature of a monster, you can swap the Magic keyword for Psionic or vice versa, or remove it entirely if your monster achieves the same results through gadgetry or martial prowess.
AMBUSHER ABILITIES





ARTILLERY ABILITIES
CONTROLLER ABILITIES















BRUTE ABILITIES

DEFENDER ABILITIES



	
HARRIER ABILITIES






MOUNT ABILITIES





 HEXER ABILITIES	


SUPPORT ABILITIES




ANGULOTLS
If you see one, try surrendering! Because you're already surrounded.
-PINNA, HEDGE MAGE
Found in freshwater swamps, rivers, and rainforests, angulotls (anggwaLAHtulls) are diminutive, brightly colored amphibious humanoids. Rather than defending their settlements and breeding grounds against hostile creatures, these poisonous frog folk prefer to establish their homes in places that are nigh-impossible for other humanoids to find, such as underwater caves and other enclosed spaces only accessible by water. They are happy to hide and watch a gaggle of noisy adventurers stumble past the entrance to an angulotl clutch without realizing it. Though angulotls prefer to avoid combat, when they're threatened or pressed, they turn deadly.
DEADLY TOXINS	
Angulotls are poisonous creatures, which suits their preference to avoid aggression-they don't need to be! The contact toxin secreted by their skin gives them an edge in close combat; they also distill this toxin into more potent forms for coating blades and tipping darts.
INDICATOR SPECIES	
Angulotl physiology is delicately balanced, and it doesn't take much to upset it. While toxins don't kill them, they are still affected by pollutants in their waters. Ongoing contamination of their environment can corrupt angulotls, making them aggressive, confused, and angry. Most pollution-corrupted angulotls eventually attack any creature who crosses their path-even other angulotls!
Runoff from magical experimentation seems to affect them the most ... and sometimes gives them strange abilities.
MOISTURE DEPENDENT	
Angulotls breathe through their skin, but they need to stay damp or they suffocate. They often avoid travel in very dry areas, and they prefer not to stray far from a source of freshwater ... unless it's raining.
CLAWFISH	
Known as q'ukutxal (kooOOKootshaal) to angulotls, the clawfish resembles a moray eel with eight reptilian legs. These small beasts can slither through grass and clamber up trees nearly as well as they glide through river currents. Angulotls train them not only to pull rafts, but to cleverly fight by choking or electrocuting foes.
ANGULOTL LANGUAGES

Most angulotls speak Filliaric.
WET

Angulotls make use of a unique condition called wet. While wet, angulotls don't provoke opportunity attacks by moving. Meanwhile, wet non-angulotls that end their turn with 0 speed remaining slip and fall prone. Several angulotl

abilities inflict wet, but a creature can also become wet by entering a body of water.

ANGULOTL MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any angulotl's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Leapfrog ? 3 Malice
Until the end of the round, when an angulotl moves through an ally's space, that ally can jump 3 squares as a free triggered action.Resonating Croak ? 5 Malice
Each angulotl pu?s out their throat and starts loudly droning. All
non-angulotls adjacent to an angulotl must make an Intuition test.
?	=11  5 sonic damage; slowed (EoT)
? 12-16  4 sonic damage
?	17+  No effectRainfall ? 7 Malice
An angulotl calls clouds to cover the battlemap and rain until the
end of the round. All creatures and objects that are exposed to
the sky are wet for the rest of the encounter.
	

ANGULOTL CLEAVER	LEVEL 1 MINION AMBUSHERAngulotl, Humanoid	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 4	Immunity poison 2
Speed 6 (swim, climb)	Size 1S / Stability 0
With Captain Strike damage +1	Free Strike 2
Might 0	Agility +2	Reason 0	Intuition +1	Presence 0Hop & Chop (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage
?	17  5 damage
Effect The cleaver jumps 4 squares before or after attacking.Toxiferous
When an adjacent enemy grabs or uses a melee ability against the
cleaver, they take 2 poison damage.
ANGULOTL DART	LEVEL 1 MINION ARTILLERYAngulotl, Humanoid	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 3	Immunity poison 2
Speed 5 (swim, climb)	Size 1S / Stability 0
With Captain Ranged distance +4	Free Strike 2
Might 0	Agility +2	Reason +1	Intuition 0	Presence 0Poison Dart (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Ranged 8	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 poison damage
?	17  5 poison damage
Effect This ability has an edge on targets that don't have full Stamina.Toxiferous
When an adjacent enemy grabs or uses a melee ability against the
dart, they take 2 poison damage.


RETAINER	

ANGULOTL HOPPERLEVEL 1 HARRIER RETAINERAngulotl, HumanoidEV 13Stamina 30Immunity poison 2Speed 6 (swim, climb)Size 1S / Stability 0Free Strike 2Might +1	Agility +2Reason 0Intuition 0	Presence 0Leapfrog (Action) ? 2d10 + Highest Characteristic ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target 1 creature or object
?	=11  3 damage
? 12-16  5 damage
?	17  7 damage
Effect Before or after attacking, the hopper jumps two squares, or four squares if they jump over their mentor's space.Toxiferous
When an adjacent enemy grabs or uses a melee ability against the
hopper, they take 3 poison damage.



ANIMALS
The natural denizens of every world. Beasties ferocious, atrocious, and precocious roam the land between and among civilizations. Whether they graze or hunt, stay solitary, in packs, or in swarms, fight danger or fly from it, their goal is to live on.
Beware! Most animals are not monsters, but are often twisted by magic and malice to become monsters. A hero wouldn't mercilessly kill a pack of hungry wolves-they slay rot magic dire wolves created by vampires. When drawing steel, know what lies ahead of the heroes and handle the situation justly.
ANIMAL TRAITS	
You can adjust the animal stat blocks to more closely model the animal's most identifiable traits. You can freely spend up to 4 points on traits to add to a stat block. Each point you spend after 4 increases the EV of the stat block by 2.
Unless otherwise specified, you can only buy a trait once.
MOBILITY TRAITS
 BURROWING (COSTS 2 POINTS)	
The animal's movement has the burrow keyword.
+1 Point The animal can burrow through stone and creates a tunnel of their size while burrowing.
Typically used by Ants, Groundhogs, Mohlers
 CLIMBING (COSTS 1 POINT)	
The animal's movement has the climb keyword.
Typically used by Jaguars, Monkeys
FLIGHT (COSTS 2 POINTS)

The animal's movement has the fly keyword and their stability decreases by 2 (to a minimum of 0).
+1 Point Their movement also has the hover keyword.
Typically used by Birds, Bees
LEAPING (COSTS 2 POINTS)

On their turn, the animal can high or long jump up to half their speed in addition to their movement.
Typically used by Frogs, Rabbits
SLINKING (COSTS 1 POINT)

The animal can use their move action to shift 3, even while prone.
Typically used by Snakes, Vermin
 SWIFTNESS (COSTS 1 POINT) (CAN BE BOUGHT 2 TIMES)	
The animal's speed increases by 2 and they ignore difficult terrain.
Typically used by Wolves, Tigers
SWIMMING (COSTS 1 POINT)

The animal's movement has the swim keyword.
Typically used by Fish, Penguins

DEFENSIVE TRAITS
CAMOUFLAGE (COSTS 1 POINT)

The animal can hide even while observed. The animal automatically hides at the end of their turn while no enemy has line of effect to them.
Typically used by Chameleons, Foxes, Tigers
FEARSOME (COSTS 2 POINTS)

As a maneuver, the animal makes an imposing display. Each enemy within 2 of the animal I<1 shifts 3 squares away.
Typically used by Aardvarks, Lions, Peacocks
PACHYDERM (COSTS 1 POINT) (CAN BE BOUGHT 2 TIMES)

The animal starts combat with 10 temporary Stamina.
Typically used by Bears, Elephants, Rhinoceroses
 PACK (COSTS 1 POINT)	
The animal can't be flanked or frightened while adjacent to an ally.
Typically used by Hyenas, Sheep, Wolves
 PLATED (COSTS 1 POINT)	
The animal imposes a bane on incoming melee strikes and their stability increases by 2.
Typically used by Beetles, Crabs, Turtles
 SLIPPERY (COSTS 1 POINT)	
The animal ignores opportunity attacks and has an edge on escaping grabs.
Typically used by Eels, Lizards
SPINY (COSTS 1 POINT)

When an adjacent enemy grabs or uses a melee ability against the animal, they take 3 damage.
Typically used by Porcupines, Urchins
STENCH (COSTS 2 POINTS)

At the start of the animal's turn, each enemy adjacent to the animal M<1 shifts 1 square away.
Typically used by Skunks, Oxen, Wolverines
UNRELENTING (COSTS 2 POINTS)

Once per combat, when the animal is reduced to 0 Stamina, they can either survive with 1 Stamina or immediately move up to their speed and make a free strike before dying.
Typically used by Boars, Bears
 WITHDRAW (COSTS 2 POINTS)	
When the animal takes damage, they can use a triggered action to reduce all incoming damage by half until the start of their next turn.
Typically used by Armadillos, Turtles

WEB (COSTS 2 POINTS)
The animal gains the following ability.



OFFENSIVE TRAITS
 CHARGER (COSTS 1 POINT)	
The animal's signature action has the charge keyword. They have an edge on the ability while charging.
Typically used by Boars, Rhinoceroses, Swordfish
FRENZY (COSTS 1 POINT)

The animal has an edge on strikes against bleeding and winded creatures.
Typically used by Blood Bats, Piranhas, Sharks
GRAPPLER (COSTS 1 POINT)

The animal's signature action inflicts A<1 grabbed.
+1 Point An enemy has a bane to escape the animal's grab.
Typically used by Apes, Octopuses, Snakes
HUNTER (COSTS 1 POINT)

The animal ignores concealment.
Typically used by Eagles, Rats, Wolves
MULTILIMB (COSTS 2 POINTS) (CAN BE BOUGHT 2 TIMES)

The animal can target an additional creature or object whenever they make a free strike, grab, or use knockback.
Typically used by Monkeys, Octopuses, Quadrakangas
PROJECTILE (COSTS 2 POINTS)

The animal's signature action gains the Ranged keyword, adds Ranged 10 to the distance, and the damage type of ranged strikes can become either acid or cold damage.
Typically used by Archer Fish, Snakes
POUNCER (COSTS 1 POINT)

As a maneuver, the animal jumps 3 squares. If they land on an enemy their size or smaller, that enemy is knocked prone and the animal makes a free strike against them.
Typically used by Foxes, Wild Cats
POWER (COSTS 1 POINT)

The forced movement of the animal's abilities increase by 2.
Typically used by Bears, Bulls, Lions
REACH (COSTS 1 POINT) (CAN BE BOUGHT 2 TIMES)

The distance of the animal's signature action increases by 2, and the damage type can become sonic damage.
Typically used by Frogs, Giraffes, Pistol Shrimp
VENOM (COSTS 1 POINT)

The animal's signature action deals an additional 2 poison damage and inflicts M<1 weakened (save ends).
Typically used by Platypuses, Snakes, Wasps






Typically used by Pelagic Snails, Spiders
SUPERNATURAL TRAITS
DEATH FUMES (COSTS 10 POINTS)

When the animal takes damage, each creature adjacent to the animal M<1 takes half their current Stamina in damage.
Typically used by Death Snails
ELEMENTAL (COSTS 2 POINTS)

The animal has an affinity for one of the following damage types: acid, cold, corruption, fire, lightning, poison. The animal has affinity immunity 3 and the damage type of their strikes becomes affinity damage.
Typically used by Fire Salamanders, Ice Bats
GELATINOUS (COSTS 2 POINTS)

The animal can move through spaces as if they were size- 1T. When the animal takes damage, they can use a triggered action to separate into 2 animals, splitting their current Stamina in half between them. The animals have the same statistics as the original.
Typically used by Cats, Terrorjellies
HYPNOSIS (COSTS 2 POINTS)

As a maneuver, the animal targets an enemy within 5 to be
R<1 dazed (save ends) with their gaze or their roar. Typically used by Angler Fish, Tigers, Snakes IMPOSER (COSTS 2 POINTS)
The animal's size increases by 1 (to a minimum of size-2)
and their stability increases by 2. The animal's strikes deal an additional 3 damage.
Typically used by Dire Animals, Terror Lizards
INCORPOREAL (COSTS 2 POINTS)

The animal can move through solid matter and imposes a bane on incoming strikes. If the animal ends their turn inside solid matter, they are shunted out into the space they originally entered.
Typically used by Barn Owls, Tiger Wraith
TRANSLATION (COSTS 2 POINTS)

The animal's movement has the teleport keyword.
+1 Point Their movement also has the hover keyword.
Typically used by Quantum Spiders, Thrazzes

ANIMAL NOTATION	
When the rules call for an animal stat block, they'll use a shorthand for building the animal quickly.
For example, a Dire Wolf (Predator B: Swiftness, Pack, Hunter) is calling for the Predator B stat block that uses the traits Swiftness, Pack, and Hunter. The traits are listed in category order.
EXAMPLE ANIMALS
The following table provides several animals that can be built with the stat blocks using animal traits.

AnimalEnvironmentStat BlockAnimal TraitsEVDescriptionRot BatCaves, Desolate BattlefieldsAnimalFlight, Hunter, Elemental: corruption14A large, mangy bat with a skin-peeling bite and a terrible scream.ThrazzTimescapeAnimalGrappler, Hunter, Translation12A hexocular, hexapod canine with no fur and no fear.Wild HorseGrasslands, CanyonsBig Animal ASwiftness 2, Charger12A grazing equine with a remarkable top speed and powerful charge.QuadrakangaTimescapeBig Animal ALeaping, Multilimb, Pouncer14A highly aggressive four-armed kangaroo with a punch that can pierce steel.RhinocerosGrasslands, DesertsBig Animal BPlated, Charger, Power16A horn-nosed ungulate with a plated hide and poor eyesight.Cass-o-warCanyons, JunglesBig Animal BSwiftness, Fearsome, Reach16A long-limbed sprinting bird with a colorful collar of waddles and a whip-like tail.BearForests, ArcticPredator AClimbing, Pachyderm, Unrelenting12An imposing dog-like mammal with loose, thick skin and a huge appetite.Titan BeetleCaves, JunglesPredator AFlight, Plated, Multilimb14A hardy beetle that can stand on their hind legs, giving the appearance of an armored warrior.Dire WolfForests, SwampsPredator BSwiftness, Pack, Hunter16A massive wolf covered in rot and rigid fur.Wode ToadThe Deep WodePredator BLeaping, Grappler, Reach 218A giant hairy toad with clawed limbs and two tongues, one on both ends.Piranha SchoolRivers, SwampsSwarmSwimming, Spiny, Frenzy12An aggressive family of fanged fish that leave no remnants of their prey behind.Slag Mite SwarmDesolate BattlefieldsSwarmBurrowing, Venom12A family of silver bugs with excruciatingly painful mandibles for feeding on iron and copper with.




ANKHEG
Pebbles dance as the ground quivers. A spray of rock and earth shatters the afternoon's peace, and an ankheg blooms from the earth. Their mandibles drip sizzling acid as a talon impales their next meal: sometimes a fat sheep, other times a shepherd.
An ankheg is a chitinous, burrowing monstrosity larger than a horse. Their hooked claws and serrated mandibles are fearsome weapons, but even more dangerous is the stream of caustic spittle they use to dissolve their prey.
PASTORAL PEST
Although ankhegs can be found anywhere, they are a particular plague in settled lands. Ankhegs hunt alone, lurking a few feet below roadways and pastures. When their sensitive antennae detect movement above, they burst from the earth, dragging living prey into their tunnels to be devoured. These hit-and-run tactics make ankhegs virtually impossible to eradicate-unless they have the bad luck to ambush a party of well-armed adventurers. Many communities pay a handsome bounty for a slain ankheg.
TERROR OF THE THAW	
Ankhegs are a year-round menace in the warmest lands. In temperate places, ankhegs hibernate during the winter, granting farmers a season of peace ... but this respite is paid for on the first thaw of spring, when every ankheg awakens ravenous on the same day and bursts from the ground to feed.


ANKHEG MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of an ankheg's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Burning Maw ? 3 Malice
The ankheg dribbles acid over their mandibles. Their next strike deals 6 acid damage until the end of their turn.Geyser ? 5 Malice
The ankheg tunnels underneath the encounter map cause a sudden in?lux of hot gas to burst from a 2-square-by-2-square area on the ground. Each enemy in an affected square must make an Agility test.
?	=11  3 damage; vertical push 5; prone
? 12-16  3 damage; vertical push 2
?	17+ The target shifts to the nearest unoccupied space outside the area.Earth Sink ? 10 Malice
The area of the encounter map slowly sinks into the ground. Each creature who starts their turn on the ground and can't burrow must spend 1 extra square of movement to leave their starting position, or 2 squares if they start their turn prone or restrained. A creature who starts and ends their turn in the same space and
can't burrow is restrained by the ground (save ends).
	

ASHEN HOARDER
Grave robbing is dangerous business, but necromancers need bodies for their experiments. To procure supplies and stay out of danger, these mages build ashen hoarders- hulking constructs made of magically reinforced humanoid bones.
APPENDAGES AND SPIKES	
Ashen hoarders sport four long legs made from compact columns of bone, allowing them to move quickly and avoid creatures who might try to hinder the construct's grim work. Articulated arms with attached tools and weapons aid the hoarder in digging up corpses and fighting enemies.
When an ashen hoarder obtains a corpse, the construct impales it on one of the many sharp bones protruding from their back. These spikes secure the corpses and charge them with necrotic energy, ensuring the cargo is ready for experimentation when it arrives at the necromancer's door.
WEAPONIZED BODIES	
These automatons are equipped to protect their cargo. If enemies corner an ashen hoarder, the construct can use the energy stored within their corpses to reanimate them as deadly mines, detonating the remains with explosive corruptive energy. Once the threat is dead, the ashen hoarder can retrieve the enemies' remains and recollect the pieces of their original load.
SOUL SHACKLE
Ashen hoarders require a vast amount of necromantic energy to create but also to power continuously. Along with an entire ossuary worth of bones to construct its body, powering it requires a soul. The soul is partially bound into an object known as a Soul Shackle, usually a ring or an amulet, and is used to command the construct. It's an agonizing process for the victim and freeing them is no easy task. Destroying the Soul Shackle is enough to send an ashen hoarder into an indiscriminate unshackled rage, as it can feel part of its soul shredded into oblivion. It will kill any living creature it can before collapsing in on itself.
Freeing the soul trapped inside requires a long-term project and the assistance of a powerful holy figure.

	

BASILISKS
They're great guard dogs. You just gotta raise 'em from eggs. No, no. Don't look her in the eye. She turned the tax collector to stone the other day when he tried to pet her. She's just a big softie, really.
STONE COLD LOOKS
With eight legs, a scaled rough hide, and razor-sharp teeth coated in poison, the basilisk is a deadly threat-even aside from their petrifying eye beams. This dreadful creature can fell the mightiest of foes with a look, turning them into immobilized stone statues. Horrifyingly, the basilisk's petrified prey remain aware of their fate and surroundings, trapping them in an unending nightmare.
RAISING YOUNG	
Basilisks typically live in mated pairs and raise small clutches of younglings from the comforts of damp caves. Adults prefer to subsist on berries, fish, fowl, and carrion, resorting to eating their petrified victims only when starving. On the other hand, basilisk younglings can only eat petrified victims, and families of basilisk have been known to travel far from their nest to populated areas in search of prey for their babies.
DANGEROUS SERVITORS
Crime lords and overminds seek basilisk eggs to raise and train as bodyguards and pets. Training is dangerous, and many handlers (and their unscrupulous colleagues) find themselves turned to stone as the basilisk escapes and runs amok.
Some creatures keep basilisks not for their terrifying abilities, but for their immunity to petrification. Medusas, largely due to their own limited options for companionship, commonly keep basilisks as pets. Both parties benefit from this symbiotic relationship, as the medusa feeds their own victims to the basilisk and their younglings.
ALCHEMICAL PROPERTIES
Alchemists have discovered that after a basilisk eats petrified flesh, the basilisk's gullet produces an oil that can be used to restore a petrified victim. Unsavory alchemists pay good money to those willing to steal a basilisk youngling from their nest.


	

BREDBEDDLE
In their true forms, bredbeddles are ogre-sized, headless giants. Forever searching for their missing heads, they are drawn to populous lands, where they decapitate passers-by and magically adopt their victims' forms.
Although bredbeddles have no traditional sensory organs of their own, they are keenly aware of their surroundings. Some lurk along dark country lanes in their monstrous true forms. Others walk disguised among crowds, dropping their facades only long enough to waylay a stranger and lop off their head.
IMMORTAL WANDERERS	
Bredbeddles don't age, and if they are slain, their bodies reform a few days later. Long ago, bredbeddles were giants who stood high among the nobility of giant kind. But when they declared themselves rulers of all giant kind, their kin thwarted the coup and beheaded the bredbeddles. Now these fallen nobles search the world for their missing heads, each wielding the axe that decapitated them. Many claim their heads are kept for safekeeping in a fire giant's cellar to be returned after an indeterminate period of good behavior (which no bredbeddles has exhibited thus far).
GREEN WITH FRENZY	
The longer a bredbeddle goes without a head, the more twisted and desperate their power grows. Their desire to be whole stretches out of their body in the form of shadowy dark-green ribbons, wrapping around and clinging to every surface they spill onto.
Travelers warn one another of roads rumored to be haunted by "wild green knights," often avoiding the routes for months. No journey is worth losing your head over.
BREDBEDDLE LANGUAGES	
When a bredbeddle communicates, they usually use the languages that their head's previous owner knew or High Kuric. A bredbeddle that's taken multiple heads over their lifetime will most likely know Caelian as well.


BREDBEDDLE MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of a bredbeddle's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Engreen ? 3 Malice
The bredbeddle's axe lengthens and turns a ghastly green, increasing the distance of the bredbeddle's melee strikes and the dimensions of their area abilities by 1 until the end of their turn.Shadow Stockade ? 5 Malice
A ghostly size-1L stockade seeps out from under the bredbeddle's feet into an unoccupied square within 10 squares. When a size-1L or smaller enemy enters the stockade's square, they are restrained (save ends). When a restrained creature frees themself, the stockade fades away. At the start of each of the bredbeddle's subsequent turns, they can slide the stockade and any creature in it up to 3 squares.Green Phantom ? 7 Malice
	

BUGBEARS
They are the Bu'gath in the Kheltic tongue, or the bearers of the great fear. The modern bugbears come from early goblins who first stepped into the wode centuries ago. Fae magic twisted their bodies until they grew imposingly tall and hairy while removing all sound from their footsteps.
Many bugbears go on to become legendary hunters and mercenaries. Many more become reclusive and hide their whole lives in the shadows. A rare few dive into their magic potential and become living nightmares that haunt the wode.
THROWN INTO THE FRAY	
Bugbears seldom seek other civilizations for trade or allyship. They usually appear to defend their own homes or their neighbors' homes. This has given them a reputation of being covert, insurgent warriors, when in reality the bugbears fight to maintain their quiet solitude.
When bugbears are compelled to take action, they take to the high ground and use their powerful arms to throw anything they can down at the problem. This includes daggers, heavy iron balls, each other, and sometimes throwing the enemy at the enemy.
GOBLIN BOND	
Bugbears value their shared origin with goblins and hobgoblins despite the three branching apart so dramatically. They prefer goblinoid in circles where humanoid is used and it provides a sense of common ground when cloistered bugbears come out of isolation. It's not uncommon to see bugbears work alongside groups of goblins or hobgoblins.
BU'GATHIC MAGIC	
Most bugbears have a minor level over their inherent magic, enabling them to perform a trick or two. Dedicated bugbear channelers have learned to evoke it as powerful shadow and rot magic. These shamans can reshape the appearance of the world around them and temporarily alter their foes as defensive tactics, providing ample warning to offenders that they are capable of far worse if they push onward. Bu'gathic magic also enables bugbears to hide their settlements behind shadowy veils within canyons and impenetrable swamplands.
BUGBEAR LANGUAGES	
Most bugbears speak Caelian, Khelt, and Szetch.

	

	

RETAINER	

CHIMERA
Massive flexing claws. Lashing draconic tail. Nimble leathery wings. And not one, but three menacing heads: a snarling lion, a helix-horned ram, and a dragon with fire sparking in its throat. Many see the chimera as an aggressor, but few know its origins as a divine guardian.
THE FIRST CHIMERA
The first chimera was a gift. A deity gave a devout queen this young guardian-one with the cunning of a dragon, the bravery of a lion, and the tenacity of a ram. The queen raised the chimera to be a strong protector of not just her person, but of her people, who loved the chimera and their ruler. But neighboring lands feared the beast. As a conquering force swept into the land, their first defilement of peace was slaughtering the chimera.
The queen's resulting fury was said to be felt by the gods. As she screamed, a nearby volcano erupted, spewing basalt and chimeras over the land. With fiery might, the chimeras overtook the opposing army and dispersed. Each found a new territory and claimed the role of divine protector over that place, its inhabitants, and its treasures.
TACTICAL WARRIORS	
Chimeras have many ways to keep themselves and their charges from being cornered. The lion head snaps up enemies in massive jaws and hurls them away, the ram head pummels them to the ground, and the dragon head bathes them in fire. The sound of the three heads crying together can shake even the most stalwart warriors.
ONE BEING, THREE HEADS	
Unlike many other multiheaded creatures, a chimera has a single mind. Their heads work together, never snapping at one another over food, favors, or personality conflicts. The heads often express the chimera's emotions in unison, braying together in times of battle or purring all at once to show affection.


CHIMERA MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of a chimera's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Defensive Snapping ? 3 Malice
The chimera takes up a defensive stance. Until the start of their next turn, the chimera can make a free strike against each enemy that comes within 2 of them.Unstable Terrain ? 5 Malice
The chimera shakes the crowd, causing loose rocks or debris to appear. Create three size 1L stone objects anywhere on the battle?ield. Each creature adjacent to one of the objects when it appears takes A<2 5 damage.Ashen Clouds ? 7 Malice
Until the beginning of the chimera's next turn, the entire battle map is concealed by a thick cloud of ash. The chimera ignores concealment. Each enemy R<1 can't establish line of e?ect beyond 3 squares until the cloud dissipates. The potency of this feature
increases by 1 each time it's used.
	

DEMONS
Demons spawn in the Abyssal Wasteland, where evil and chaos meet. These creatures of incarnate evil crave violence and suffering in the way most other creatures need food. A demon cares only for themself, and they torture and tear apart lesser demons for fun.
The bestial appearance of each demon is unique, composed of a chaotic arrangement of teeth, claws, and limbs meant for killing. Even demons of the same kind have unique features. One might bear an extra set of eyes or teeth, while another has a human arm growing from their forehead.
MORTAL ALLIANCES	
Demons form temporary alliances with evil mortals in exchange for souls to consume. Such alliances create carnage with alarming efficiency, though they inevitably collapse when the demons decide to devour their foolish partners. The only creature who can truly keep a demon in line is a more powerful demon.
SOUL REAVERS	
Demons feast not on food or water, but on souls. Souls fuel their anarchic powers, and while starved for souls, a demon can scarcely think. Whenever a demon kills a creature with a soul, they consume that soul and keep its energy within their body. A demon can then burn that soul energy to enact their most devastating abilities.
DEMONIC HIERARCHY	
Mortal scholars have classified demons into ten categories, and the higher a demon's category, the more powerful the fiend. Though demons don't use these classifications themselves, this system reflects their hierarchy, as stronger demons bully the weak into service.
Each time a demon consumes a soul, there's a chance they might evolve into a more powerful demon. The evolution from one category to the next can be instant, or it can take years. This inconsistency has led to much scholarly debate on whether all souls are equal, or whether demonic evolution is aided by the consumption of souls that are especially corrupt-or heroic.
The following demons have been identified across categories 1-3:
* Pitlings resemble rodents or insects, but possess gleaming green eyes and terrible body odor, and disgorge a viscous, toxic phlegm.
* Ensnarers are the result of pitlings getting ahold of an unfortunate soul. The pitling is in the process of digesting the soul of a creature, physically boring through its head, and flopping around like an appendage. The body is puppeteered and mid transformation into a demon, with mouths forming on the creature's hands and arms that shoot out long, barbed tongues as attacks.
* Frenzied are similar to ensnarers, but their transformation into a true demon is more advanced, resulting in a fast and viscous creature full of energy and hunger for more souls.
* Rumored to be the initial source of the teachings of all shadows through the College of Black Ash, remasches

are demons whose physical form is blended with the nature of the wastes where they dwell. A remasch teleports around the battlefield, inflicting chaos on their enemies directly or through the minions they control.
* Possessed of glowing eyes and tendril-ringed maws, ruinants breathe with a sickening wheeze and have bodies covered in inflamed scars. A ruinant can inflict fresh wounds and burns on their victims in a pattern mirroring those on the demon's own body.
* Torlases are piecemeal abominations whose physical forms don't obey the normal laws of geometry. They control the battlefield by using living flesh and whipping allies and enemies alike into advantageous position.
* Bendraks appear as an amalgamation of flesh and shards of a broken mirror, able to shape their bodies to distract and confuse their foes. A bendrak can divert an enemy's attack to another enemy or hide themselves or allies behind dazzling reflections.
* Mucerons are the result of an ensnarer going through repeated demon evolutions to become a brutish creature, covered in several mouths that shoot out barbed tongues, pulling an enemy's attention along with pulling them physically.
* Chorogaunts are terrifying demon leaders. Each is an amalgamation of several demon bodies formed into a mobile, living musical instrument. Several heads are arranged into a chorus embedded in the demon's chest and its ribs are upturned into a fleshy pipe organ. Their attacks entrance and confuse enemies, making them more vulnerable to other demons.

DEMON LANGUAGES	
Demons speak Proto-Ctholl.


DEMON MALICE	LEVEL 1+ MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any demon's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Soulburn ? 3 Malice
Each demon acting this turn has a double edge on their abilities.Abyssal Rift ? 7 Malice
Two size 2 rifts to the Abyssal Wasteland appear at locations of your choosing. Any demon can use an abyssal rift as a portal to another abyssal rift in the encounter, moving into any space in one rift and appearing immediately in any unoccupied space in the other rift. A non-demon creature who enters the rift for the ?rst time in a round or starts their turn there takes corruption damage equal to the level of the highest-level demon on the encounter map.
An abyssal rift is an immovable object that has Stamina 25, weapon immunity 5, and holy weakness 5. A creature who has the Magic or Psionics skill can make a hard Reason or Intuition test as a maneuver while adjacent to a rift to destabilize it. On success, the rift closes. On failure, the rift regains 5 Stamina. The rift closes when there are no demons remaining on the encounter map.Abyssal Evolution ? 7 Malice
A demon minion of your choice turns into a non-minion demon of
the same level.


	

DEMON RUINANTLEVEL 1 BAND HARRIERAbyssal, DemonEV 3Stamina 15Weakness Holy 3Speed 6Size 1M/ Stability 0Free Strike 1Might +0	Agility +2Reason +0Intuition +0  Presence +1Bloodletting Claws (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? SignatureKeywords Melee, Strike, WeaponDistance Melee 1	Target Two creatures or objects?	=11  3 damage? 12-16  4 damage?	17+  5 damage; M<2 bleeding (save ends)Salt Wounds (Maneuver) ? 2d10 + 2 ? 3 Malice
Keywords Magic, Ranged
Distance Ranged 10 Target Three creatures without full Stamina
?	=11  1 corruption damage
? 12-16  2 corruption damage
?	17+  3 corruption damageLethe
While winded, the ruinant has an edge on strikes, and strikes have an edge against them.Soulsight
Each creature within 2 of the ruinant can't be hidden from them.
DEMON CHOROGAUNTLEVEL 3 LEADERAbyssal, DemonEV 20Stamina 120Weakness Holy 5Speed 5Size 1L/ Stability 2Free Strike 5Might +2	Agility +2Reason +2Intuition +2  Presence +2Agonizing Harmony (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? Signature
Keywords Area, Melee, Weapon
Distance 5 burst	Target Each enemy in the burst
?	=11  4 psychic damage; I<1 slowed (save ends)
? 12-16  7 psychic damage; I<2 slowed (save ends)
?	17+  10 psychic damage; I<3 slowed (save ends)
Effect An ally within 10 squares of the chorogaunt can shift up to their speed.Chaotic Entrancing Harmony (Maneuver)
Keywords Area
Distance 10 burst	Target Each enemy in the burst
Effect Each target slides 3, ignoring their stability.I Thrive on Pain (Triggered Action) ? 3 Malice
Keywords Magic
Distance Self	Target Self
Trigger The chorogaunt is targeted by a strike.
Effect Any damage from the attack is halved, and the chorogaunt deals an additional 3 damage with their abilities until the end of their next turn.End Effect
At the end of their turn, the chorogaunt can take 5 damage to end one save ends e?ect a?ecting them. This damage can't be reduced in any way.Lethe
While winded, the chorogaunt has an edge on strikes, and strikes have an edge against them.Soulsight
Each creature within 2 of the chorogaunt can't be hidden from them.Frightening Tones (Villain Action 1)
Keywords Ranged
Distance Ranged 10	Target Three enemies
Effect The chorogaunt allows each target to choose between taking 5 psychic damage or being frightened (save ends).Bully the Weak (Villain Action 2)
Keywords Magic, Ranged
Distance Ranged 10	Target One ally
Effect The chorogaunt kills the target, and each other ally deals an additional 3 damage on attacks until the end of the round. The Director gains malice equal to the number of heroes.Running Cacophony (Villain Action 3)
Keywords Magic
Distance Self	Target Self
Effect The chorogaunt shifts up to their speed, uses their Agonizing Harmony, shifts up to their speed, and then uses
their Agonizing Harmony again.
DEMONS - 2ND ECHELON
As demons consume more souls, and their mercurial forms shift into more powerful ones, they also begin to develop more distinct personalities, desires, and intelligence based on the souls consumed. It's now that demons begin to develop a particular taste for types of souls which, should they survive long enough, will eventually define them.
HIGHER CATEGORIES OF DEMONS
The following demons have been identified across categories 4-6:
* Grulqin's consist of a bulbous head two powerful arms and circular bone saw blade that runs down the middle of its head.
* Orliq are made of shifting bone plates surrounding a swirling core of corruptive energy.
* The wobalas prefers to kill from afar while protected by allies, firing physic arrows from bows made from their very flesh and sinew.
* Bale Eyes, sometimes called a Flesh Moon, are colossal floating orbs of roiling, dripping flesh. A weeping seam opens to reveal a demonic eye whose gaze melts flesh from bone.
* Fangling bodies are overgrown with teeth, fangs, and tusks from a thousand different creatures. Deadly to take on in close quarters, they've been known to get caught on one another.
* Gunge demons are horrifically distended with maws that could swallow a horse whole. It vomits up bilious slime that traps and dissolves any unlucky enough to get caught in it.
* Niktin are cunning hunters that disguise themselves as mundane objects that leave an oily foul smelling red residue wherever they are left. Their natural form is a humanoid made of red oil.
* Tourmenauk's resemble a hulking ape with a dozen or more extra mouths distributed around their body. Though their brute force is formidable enough, this demon also inflicts raw psychic pain by screaming from their mouths in different voices-often using the agonized voices of souls the tormenauk has devoured.
* The Lumbering Egress is a walking mass of warped flesh around a giant whirling portal to the demonic realms. Lesser demons pour out at alarming rates making these creatures devastating siege engines.


DEMON MALICE	LEVEL 4+ MALICE FEATURESAt the start of a level 4+ demon's turn, you can spend malice to
activate one of the following features.Prior Malice Features ? X Malice
The demon activates a malice feature available to demons level 3
or lower.Abyssal Jaunt ? 3 Malice
A demon acting on this turn folds space around them, temporarily slipping in and out of the abyss. Until the start of the demon's next turn, the demon ignores di?cult terrain, can move freely through solid matter, and doesn't provoke opportunity attacks by moving. If the demon ends their turn inside solid matter, they are
forced out into the space they originally entered.


	

DEVILS
In the lower plane of Hell, devils of the Seven Cities vie unceasingly against each other for power and control-a conflict fought foremostly through cunning and schemes. Devils are distinguished from other humanoids by skin in shades of azure and crimson and their hellmarks: horns, tails, hooves, wings, and other such infernal features.
PRECARIOUS PYRAMIDS	
The Seven Cities are built on a strict hierarchy and bureaucracy. Draconian chains of command place each devil in service to a higher authority-typically a more powerful devil. While devils are lawful, they're always looking for another way up the ladder. They twist every rule to their benefit to gain power and usurp those they answer to, eager to uncover loopholes in the eternal struggle for significance and supremacy.
SILVER TONGUES

These winsome devils can acquire great influence by bargaining for the souls of mortals on behalf of their archdevil. Virtuosos with words, devils are skilled at striking deals and forging contracts. They exploit the weaknesses of mortals-greed, revenge, vanity-or just simple desperation. In the heat of battle, a devil's supernatural charisma can influence a mortal to do their bidding, often without realizing until it's too late.

TRUE NAMES

All devils have two names: one they're commonly known by, and another secret true name. Every devil zealously safeguards the latter, as their true name can be spoken aloud to aid in summoning them or to strip them of their power.
HELL'S DEFECTORS

Not every devil in the Seven Cities wants to ruthlessly ascend the hierarchy. Some others do desire advancement, but they remain dissatisfied at the bottom. As luck would have it, these fiends can free themselves from Hell's bureaucracy-for when a mortal overestimates their fortitude and dies while enacting an infernal summoning, it can leave an enterprising devil stranded in the Mundane World.
Some of these defectors cling to old habits, acquiring power in mortal spheres of business, law, or politics. Others,

inspired by mortals, join adventuring parties or set out to explore the world.
DEVIL LANGUAGES	
Most devils speak Anjal and Caelian, among other languages. The more powerful a devil, the more languages they tend to learn-to better make ironclad contracts with a wide variety of people and cultures. Outside of rare circumstances, devils are always willing to negotiate, ever desiring to twist a situation in their favor.


DEVIL MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any devil's turn, you can spend malice to activate one of
the following features.Bureaucratic Tape? 3 Malice
A devil acting on this turn uses a signature action against an adjacent creature. If they roll a tier-3 result, the target has a double bane on strikes (save ends).Underhanded Tactics ? 5 Malice
Each devil in the encounter can teleport to a space adjacent to another non-hidden creature in the encounter and make a free strike.Read the Small Print ? 7 Malice
Each enemy in the encounter is subject to a bad deal proposed by the devils. An enemy must choose between damage weakness 5 or having a bane on power rolls. The bad deal lasts until the end of
the encounter.


	

	

RETAINER	

DEVIL DEFECTORLEVEL 5 HEXER RETAINERDevil, PlanarEV 23Stamina 60Immunity fire 5Speed 6 (fly)Size 1M / Stability 0Free Strike 5Might +3	Agility +2Reason +3Intuition +1  Presence +2Corrupting Flame (Action) ? 2d10 + Highest Characteristic ?
Signature
Keywords Magic, Ranged, Strike
Distance Ranged 10	Target 1 creature or object
?	=11  6 fire or corruption damage
? 12-16  10 fire or corruption damage
?	17  13 fire or corruption damageTempting Offer (Free Triggered Action, Encounter)
Keywords Attack, Melee
Distance Ranged 10	Target Triggering creature
Trigger A sapient enemy is reduced to 0 Stamina.
Effect If the creature takes the defector's offer, the creature is reduced to 1 Stamina instead of 0. If they do so, on their next turn the defector controls the creature's move action, and the creature must use a Signature Action against a creature of the defector's choice or immediately die. The Director must spend 3 Malice to have the creature turn down this offer.True Name
If a creature within 10 squares of the defector speaks the defector's true name aloud, the defector loses their immunities, the additional effects on their signature attack, and their Devilish
Charm triggered action.


DRACONIANS
Draconians-or wyrmwights as some call them-are a people created through a obscure ritual known as Dracogenesis. Most draconians have an elemental affinity connected to their scales, which they can change given enough time and training.
The draconians presented in this section aren't a band, but five individual draconian warriors whose reputations precede them. You likely won't find them all working together, but instead serving in other forces as high- ranking commanders.
AEOLYXRIA THE UNCANNY	
From the moment she hatched, Aeolyxria has enjoyed a fascination for the occult. She wanders the land gathering strange tomes and artifacts so she can study them in action. When she takes a job, it's because she has a new doohickey she wants to test out. Aeolyxria possesses a sharp, tactical mind that can turn any battlefield into her homefield advantage. If she could just get a handle on all of her equipment, she'd be unstoppable!
LOCRATIX THE MORNINGSTAR	
A traveler from a faraway land and the sole progeny of her Dracogenesis clutch, Locratix puts survival over all things. The very concept of the Dragon Knights is anathema to her; there is no reason a wyrmwight should hand over the power that keeps them alive. Locratix wanders the land taking up mercenary jobs, but she is always one better deal away from skewering her employer on the end of her lance.
LYDIXAVUS THE DEADEYE	
Nothing escapes Lydixavus or their unrivaled precision. After decades of careful training, they have honed their breath weapon into a swift and far-traveling bullet of ice. Lydixavus is motivated by revenge. Each scar, each dent in their scales has a story, and Lydixavus plans to return the favor tenfold to the perpetrator of each one.
MYXOVIDAN THE SINTAKER	
Myxovidan was raised by a secluded order of monks who claimed his obsidian-black scales and nausea-inducing breath were an evil that must be purged. They subjected him to an austere lifestyle, full of intense training, meditation, and denial of worldly pleasures. But Myxovidan's hunger would be satisfied, one way or another. When Myxovidan departed the order, he left behind little more than a group of emaciated monk corpses who looked like they had the life sucked right out of them.
PHRRYGALAX THE SUBDUER	
Phrrygalax was once a Dragon Knight in the service of Good King Omund. Though he took the oath, he was always keenly aware he was created for violence. When Mandrake's betrayal fractured the order, Phryygalax gleefully renounced his oath to follow what he believes to be his true, brutal purpose. Many who served with him believed he was merely waiting for a convenient excuse to do so.

DORZINUUTH THE BASE	
To those who know the Dragon Phalanx of old, no name inspires more awe and fear than that of Dorzinuuth. A mastermind on the battlefield and the foundation of the Dragon Knights' fraternity, Dorzinuuth was known for mounting daring campaigns and always returning with the same number of soldiers (if not more). In the wake of the death of Good King Omund, many were shocked to see him debase himself with banditry and petty mercenary jobs.
Others hold on to the hope that he makes moves in darkness, waiting for the day when he can once again uphold his oath in the light.
DRACONIAN LANGUAGES	
Most draconians speak Caelian and the language of their employers and creators.


DRACONIAN MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any draconian's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Guarding Gale ? 3 Malice
A draconian acting this turn ?aps their wings and creates a powerful gale. Each creature adjacent to the draconian is pushed 4 and M<2 knocked prone.Breath Weapon (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? 5 Malice
Keywords Area, Magic, Melee
Distance 4  2 line within 1	Target All enemies in the line
?	=11  6 damage
? 12-16  10 damage
?	17+  13 damage
Effect The damage type changes to match a damage type that the draconian has immunity to.Scaleshatter Burst (Free Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? 7 Malice
Keywords Area, Magic, Melee
Distance 2 burst	Target All enemies in the burst
?	=11  7 damage
? 12-16  13 damage
?	17+  16 damage
E?ect The draconian's scales shatter from battle damage. The
draconian has damage weakness 5, but the draconian can now take two turns per round.
	

	

	

RETAINER	

THE NAMELESS	LEVEL 6 DEFENDER RETAINERDraconian, Humanoid	EV 30Stamina 90	Immunities Corruption 6
Speed 5 (flying)	Size 1M/Stability 4
Free Strike 6
Might +3	Agility +2	Reason +1 Intuition +1  Presence +2Malice Mace (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic ? Signature
Keywords Charge, Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target One creature or object
? =11	6 damage
? 12-16  11 damage
? 17+	14 damage; push 2I'm Not a Steed, You're Equipment (Action, Encounter)
Keywords -
Distance Melee 1	Target the Nameless's mentor
Effect The Nameless's mentor enters their square and rides on their back. The Nameless or the mentor can move the mentor to an adjacent square as a free maneuver. While in the Nameless's square, the mentor moves with them, can't take their own move action, and gains 1 shield.Wing Block
Ranged attacks against the Nameless suffer a bane.


DRAGONS
We fear dragons above all else. Not only are they an expression of annihilation-our oldest and most basic dread-but they are a symbol of everything ancient, inscrutable, and unconquerable about our world.
WHERE THE ELEMENTS MEET ANGUISH	
As elementals are pure expressions of the Mundane World, their shapes can become hardened and bent by intense energies permeating their world. Over time, an elemental entangled in extreme concentrations of rancor or grief may crystallize into a terrifying beast known as a dragon.
Dragons are both a provocateur and a consequence of people's anguish. A thorn dragon will overtake crops and forests in a fortress of bramble vines and threaten to starve the people living there, yet it was born out of decades of hunger and strife that came before them. Vanquishing a dragon may be necessary to save innocent lives, but until the underlying problems are addressed, another dragon will take their place in time.
DRACO VULGARIS	
Many regular dragons share a number of commonalities between them, such as powerful wings, whiplike tails, and reptilian faces adorned with horns. People categorize them more specifically based on where they're found and how those environments have shaped their forms, such as the gloom dragon's telltale mantle of fog. Some individual dragons retain a trait or two from their primordial forms, while more powerful dragons have been known to intentionally change their shapes to distinguish themselves even further.
Across all dragons, the dragon's breath is their most violent form of self-expression. Whether they roar to ward off threats or charge their breath with elemental energy, no good comes from a dragon opening their mouth.
WYRMSCALE

Most dragons are covered in wyrmscale, a hardy plate that both absorbs and emits elemental energy. They not only protect dragons but allow them to ignite their bodies and further shape their environment. The crucible dragon, for example, lights their tail on fire to decimate structures that their breath cannot melt alone.
When a dragon feels threatened, their wyrmscale radiates massive amounts of energy and creates a barrier around them. This barrier buffers both incoming and outgoing force, allowing the dragon to become even more fearsome should their defenses break down.
A LORD OF THEIR DOMAIN

It's said that a dragon's physical form includes the land they're found in. The longer a dragon spends time in a location, the more control they have over it. The land becomes barren in an omen dragon's domain as old souls become suspended in its thickened air and new life can't breach its soil.

This impact is more than a passive consequence of a dragon's presence; dragons use their magic to set seals upon creatures and lands that they claim as their own. To be dragonsealed is to become an extension of the dragon's might and subject to their fury.
Some cultures that have developed in close proximity to a dragon may give alms to the dragon as if they were a saint, and treat the dragon's seal as a blessing. There is some truth to this-few other predators are foolish enough to encroach on a dragon's territory.
DRAGON HOARDS	
Legendary heroes protect the layperson from dragons. Foolhardy adventurers brave a dragon's lair to take their treasure.
Mature dragons hoard vast amounts of treasure and wealth as a hunting technique. The more valuable their trove, the more prey they lure into their clutches. Desperate kings have sent armies to their deaths for the opportunity to expand their kingdoms' wealth. Their efforts only further these dragon hoards as they continue to pile with enchanted armors and magical trinkets that can't be ignored.
Younger dragons still settling their domains have been known to scour ruins and old cities for treasures to start their hoard. It is not unheard of for a dragon to either repeatedly visit or settle near people who willingly give them their valuables and heirlooms.
DRACO NOBILIS	
Regular dragons should not be confused for the elder dragons. They are known otherwise as true dragons, legendary beings that are said to devour entire worlds when they finally awaken. Even the most fearsome meteor dragon only possesses a modicum of a true dragon's power and wiles.
No one has recognized a true dragon for thousands of years. However, rumor has it that a true dragon sleeps at the sun's core and is responsible for bringing light to the entire Mundane World.

THORN DRAGON
Thorn dragons take root in the destitution of nature and are cultivated by the suffering of those who struggle against the green's cruelty. Though a region's people may have long overcome past famine, the desperation of those who came before has already nurtured their future scourge.
These dragons appear born of the wood, living thickets bedecked in torturous thorns. With twisting briar horns and wings shaped by tangled roots, thorn dragons embody the richness of nature they so readily constrict the life from.
CONQUERORS OF THE GREEN
Thorn dragons cultivate their lairs in lush farmlands or flourishing forests. They overtake these beautiful regions with massive briar thickets, choking out the existing flora until the only thing that can grow are their own brambles.
In forests, this ravaging drives out the local fauna smart enough to flee rather than foolishly fight against the wood's new ruler. When a thorn dragon establishes their lair over a village's farmlands, the populace either wisely flees or starves for their pride.
NATURAL CURATORS	
More intelligent dragons seek all forms of riches for their hoard, but thorn dragons have no eye for manmade treasures. Instead, they amass the wealth of the wild they represent. Thorn dragons stockpile food, even food they won't eat, alongside uncut gemstones, minerals and ore, wood, oils, and spices.
BESTIAL INSTINCTS
Compared to more powerful dragons, thorn dragons are closer to beasts. They are incapable of speech and act primarily on instinct to expand their territory, defend their lair, and grow their hoard.
Despite this, some villages manage to avoid being driven from their homes or starved within them-at the expense of being dependent on a thorn dragon's bestial ego. These villagers come to a tenuous understanding with the dragon, trading it the kinds of treasure it desires in exchange for meager foodstuffs from the dragon's hoard.
TERRITORIAL BLOODLETTERS	
Thorn dragons are highly territorial against unexpected threats to their lair. In order to defend their home, these dragons take advantage of the thicket-by dragonsealing intruders, pushing and pulling them across the briars and letting the thorns bleed them dry. When the brambles aren't enough, thorn dragons either imbue the barbs with poison or breathe the toxins directly, taking advantage of another way to slowly drain the life from their enemies.



GLOOM DRAGON
Where twilight spills long and cold over the lands and chilling fog hangs heavy and wet through long autumns and winters, there you will find gloom dragons. Wreathed in churning shadows and glittering dark scales, gloom dragons bring with them heavy fog and mist that manifest hallucinations, trapping their prey in nightmares.
THRILL OF THE HUNT
While many dragons command grand enclosed spaces, gloom dragons make their lair within sprawling, murky wilds, commanding vast territories. As clever as ravens and as cunning as hunting beasts, they use mimicry and hallucinations to draw unsuspecting travelers further and further into the mists of their domain, until the fog swallows the sound of their prey's screams.
Where gloom dragons settle, people are known to have more nightmares than usual.
INTANGIBLE TREASURES
Gloom dragons are eerie collectors of voices, memories, nightmares, and items. As they can only repeat exactly what they've heard, they prize their vast collections of voices, tongues, and phrases, using these sounds to lure in mortals so they might draw out their memories and fears. Endlessly curious and fascinated by terror, they are keen to see what hallucinations terrorize their prey before they slaughter them.
When they have slain their foe, they take not just whatever is valuable from their person, but also whatever is meaningful to their fears. A broken mirror from a dead lover will always fascinate a gloom dragon more than a perfect ruby brooch.
UNNERVING NEIGHBORS	
Instinct and curiosity drive these enshrouded hunters. It is rare to find one that can be reasoned with, but some may develop an understanding with a nearby town, each leaving the other to their business. Since gloom dragons focus on individual terrorizing over mass destruction, it is easier to coexist with one lurking in the swamps nearby-but then these dragons become myths and stories told to children, ensuring they never follow voices into the fog.
When such an understanding is not reached, gloom dragons are feared for their command over illusions, darkness, and trickery. They have been known to torment entire regions, and as their knowledge grows, they only become more dangerous.
GLOOM DRAGON LANGUAGES
Eerie myths surround gloom dragons, as they wield languages they do not themselves speak. These draconic nightmares can mimic any sound they've heard, but more mysteriously, the magic that produces their hallucinations also mimics the sounds their foe's mind produces, no matter their tongue. Should a hero hallucinate their kin dying, everyone-friend or foe-would hear their screams for help.



CRUCIBLE DRAGON
Crucible dragons are born from metallic elementals touched by the toxic combination of fiery rage and ice-cold grief, born from failure in the pursuit of perfection. A dark forge of abandoned creativity melted down in fires of spite, jealousy, and hate.
These metallic dragons are massive, heavy creatures requiring an immense release of heat to engage in flight. Their scales range from gleaming silver to blackened iron, depending on fastidiously they are about cleaning, and occasionally gilded with more precious metals. When threatened, they can encase themselves in shields they have embedded subcutaneously beneath their scales. Their long tails terminate with a massive, hammer-like tip that can freeze over and instantly cool hot metal.
BASTIONS OF STEEL	
Crucible dragons make their homes high in the mountains, most commonly in those cut with thick veins of iron.
Occasionally they will take over a fortress or outpost, but wherever they settle the first thing in place is their colossal anvil. From there, the dragon consumes vast amounts of iron, expressing their dragonseal by slagging it in their belly to create a fortress of steel around them. Much of the slag is expelled into heated vats for forging, but they keep a small reserve inside their gut in case they need to melt any intrusive adventurers.
Eventually their entire lair is coated with hardened metal and discarded weapons, armor, and shields. This makes the lair of any crucible dragon hazardous to navigate, and extremely conductive of electricity.
DISCERNING COLLECTORS

The dragons tend to be obsessive collectors. They have a habit of hyper focusing on a singular creation when it comes to collection and replication. Bynirak, The Rain of 10,000 Spears, is known to collect only the most finely crafted and powerful magic polearms in Valsoria.
Joris'nyrathi, The Scorching Aegis, is said to have a collection of shields that would rival any god of the forge.
Obsession aside, crucible dragons do manage to accrue large amounts of armaments and armor in their hoards. They care little for gems and gold, other than melting them down for filigree and embossment on the weapons and armor they forge. Adventurers plundering a crucible dragon's hoard may not find much wealth but will usually find enough materials and armaments to supply several wars simultaneously.
FLAWED PURSUITS	
The failure that spawned the crucible dragon drives their obsessive pursuits. They will endlessly attempt to reproduce the perfect treasures they find among their most prized possessions but can only recreate flawed copies at a fraction of their original power. Discarded projects, melted heaps of raw iron, and scrap angrily embedded in the walls perpetually surround crucible dragons as examples of their failures, perpetuating a cycle of obsessive rage, grief, and inescapable decline.

HAMMERS IN SEARCH OF NAILS	
There is nothing a crucible dragon hates more than creativity, beauty, and exquisite craft. When raiding with a particular object in mind, they are not acute in how they make their entrance. Collateral damage is part of the equation and the message. Along with whatever they take, they'll endeavor to destroy any great works of art, beautiful architecture, and slay craftspeople and artists who are considered the pinnacle of their craft within the immediate proximity.
The most notorious of these attacks was made by Nuvithiabalca the Hammer of the Spiteforge, who destroyed a dwarven Forgetemple at its grand opening. To add insult to injury, she killed the Forgetemple's priesthood and its architect and absconded with the temples sacred Sainthammer before the stunned and horrified congregants could flee the grounds.
CRUCIBLE DRAGON LANGUAGES

Only the oldest of crucible dragons have been known to speak some Vastariax. However, few survivors of an encounter with a younger crucible dragon have reported the monster used the Caelian phrases "not enough" and "mine."



DWARVES
Possessed of a strength that belies their size, dwarven flesh is infused with stone-a silico-organic hybrid making them physically denser than humans or elves. They enjoy a reputation in Orden as savvy engineers and technologists thanks to the lore they inherited from their elder siblings, the long-extinct steel dwarves.
They are the children of the elder god Ord. A common phrase among the dwarves is "Ord made the world." Their way of saying, "What will be, will be." Dwarves take great pride in knowing that along with Aan, Eth, and Kul, their god created the mundane world, and many dwarves leave their homes to see the world and seek glory in Ord's name.
TOOLS OF THE TRADE	
Those raised within dwarven enclaves have a relationship with technology not found in many other places on Orden. The gifts of the Steel Dwarves are many in number, but the most prominent is that of pneumatic steam power.
Dwarves have incorporated steam into much of their warfare and weaponry, making them deadly opponents. But like all technology, it's a double headed hammer. As much as they use it for destruction, construction is where they truly shine. Creating the formidable and brutalist facades common dwarven architecture is made much easier with the use of tools created to utilize pneumatic power.
Some of the larger and more metropolitan dwarven cities are rumored to power wealthier districts using steam from geothermal vents.
INNOVATIVE OPERATION

The dwarves have yet to crack all the secrets of the valok, their ancestors' greatest achievement, but they've made great strides in researching them. They've innovated ways to repurpose, recycle, and reverse engineer (to a limited degree) valok assemblage, giving rise to a new multifaceted occupation: the operator.
Operators now span the manifold and come from all walks of life, but the first among them were dwarves who built powered suits from excavated valok parts. These suits were initially used for utility and construction purposes but can be repurposed and refitted for warfare when the need arises.
Word of these wonderous dwarven creations quickly spread among the tunnels of the underground, and up into the overworld. This led to a brief arms race where smiths, artisans, and craftspeople from all over were commissioned by wealthy rulers and aristocrats to create mechanized suits to bolster their armies and personal guard.
THE PRESS GANGS OF KAS KALAVAR	
Before Ajax came to power, the dwarves of Kas Kalavar were renowned for their disciplined constabulary. The constables were kind, kept the order, and kept the city safe.
But now, the dwarves of Kas Kalavar have submitted to Ajax's rule and pay him tribute in prisoners. Ajax has need for bodies, either as forced labor or to be used to make war

dogs and grant eternal life. Most dwarves do not like this deal, but the press gangs are committed to their work.
MARAUDER LORD
A press gang's marauder lord has in their possession a salvaged valok communication array, which they wear like a mohawk on their head. The array gives them access to magnetomancy, allowing them to shape and levitate metal, including multiple axes in battle.
SERVITOR WAR WALKERS

The war walker is a common sight both in dwarven armies and cities. They vary in appearance and make, ranging anywhere from cobbled together heaps of gears, belts, and plates to elegant and sleek marvels of dwarven engineering. In battle, they carry multiple dwarves and keep foes at a distance. In society, they're used for public transit and accessibility needs within dwarven cities.
STONE WHISPERERS

Some dwarves are born with an innate talent to communicate with the stones. Young dwarves identified with this gift are taken to a secretive enclave where they are trained to manipulate the movement and shape of stones using only whispers. The stone whispering technique is a deadly and quiet force in battle; often the rumble of stone is the only precursor to a crushing defeat.
Legends speak of stone singers, dwarves who could move mountains with their song. However, those same legends tell a tale of two stone singers that harmonized their voices and nearly ended the world. This is why today's stone whisperers stay quiet, afraid of their own potential.
DWARF LANGUAGES	
Most dwarves speak Caelian and Zaliac.

	


DWARF CATCHPOLE	LEVEL 1 MINION BRUTEDwarf, Humanoid	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 7
Speed 5	Size 1M / Stability 2
With Captain 2 temporary Stamina	Free Strike 2
Might +2	Agility 0	Reason 0	Intuition 0	Presence 0Maul (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Charge, Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage
?	17  5 damage; grabbed or prone
E?ect The catchpole deals an additional 2 damage to restrained
targets.

DWARF DRIVER	LEVEL 1 MINION HARRIERDwarf, Humanoid	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 6
Speed 7	Size 1M / Stability 1
With Captain 2 temporary Stamina	Free Strike 1
Might +2	Agility +1	Reason 0	Intuition 0	Presence 0Handaxes (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Charge, Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1 or Ranged 5	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  1 damage; push 1
? 12-16  2 damage; push 2
?	17  3 damage; push 4
Effect A target restrained by a dwarf can be pushed by this ability.
	


	

DWARF TRAPPERLEVEL 1 PLATOON HARRIERDwarf, HumanoidEV 6Stamina 36Speed 7Size 1M / Stability 2Free Strike 3Might 0	Agility +2Reason 0Intuition +1	Presence 0Concussive Bolts (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Charge, Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1 or Ranged 10	Target 1 creature or object
?	=11  5 damage; push 2
? 12-16  7 damage; push 4
?	17  9 damage; push 6
Effect A target restrained by a dwarf can be pushed by this ability.Steam Powered Snare (Maneuver) ? 3 Malice
Keywords Area, Ranged
Distance 3 cube within 5	Target All enemies in the cube
Effect Each target makes a Might test.
?	=11  7 damage; restrained (EoT)
? 12-16  5 damage; slowed (EoT)
?	17  No effect
Effect The snare remains until the end of the encounter. An enemy that moves into an affected square for the first time on
their turn must make the test.
	

RETAINER	

DWARF MORTARLEVEL 1 HEXER RETAINERDwarf, HumanoidEV 11Stamina 20Speed 5Size 1M/Stability 3Free Strike 3Might +2	Agility 0Reason 0Intuition +1	Presence 0Armor-Piercing Shell (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Range, Strike, Weapon
Distance Ranged 15	Target One creature or object
?	=11  3 damage
? 12-16  5 damage
?	17  7 damage
Effect The attack ignores cover and Temporary Stamina.Voice Thrower
The mortar can use a gadget to talk to their mentor over any
distance.



ELEMENTALS
It is in changing that we find purpose.
ATSHIA, QUEEN OF ASH
When the gods formed the Mundane World, they took sparks of creation from the roiling plane of Quintessence and gave sentience to some of the universe's most basic elements-air, fire, earth, and water. Some elementals contain just one of these components, but can come to embody multiple reagents as they age.
DUALITY OF FORM	
Elementals are mercurial creatures of transformation, creation, and destruction. Though the deities first created the Mundane World, elementals cultivated and shaped it. When a tree, stone, or other aspect of the world doesn't suit an elemental, they break it down with fire, wind, or another element, then build it anew.
Elementals themselves also change like the winds and the tides, and from age to age, they remake themselves to reflect what the world has become. They are protectors armored by stone, lizards ablaze with fire, and sometimes dragons clad in steel.
REBIRTH AND REFORMATION	
When an elemental dies in the Mundane World, their spirit returns to Quintessence, where they must rest for decades to regain strength. Should the spirit return to the Mundane World, they take on a form that reflects a creature or other aspect of that plane.
CRUX OF FIRE	
The crux of fire, often called a blazecaster, takes the form of a fiery lizard. They often live in hot zones of planar convergence or areas of volcanic activity. These territorial elementals usually question interlopers from afar-and if they don't like the answers, they rain down fire before their foes can draw near.
While many elementals weave their innate gifts into oral storytelling, cruxes of fire are particularly adroit at animating their stories in silhouettes of flame.
ESSENCE OF STORMS	
At a distance, most would mistake an essence of storms, or galeweaver, for a large bird of prey. This majestic creature is formed from streaks of colored cloud stuff woven into the silhouette of a large eagle or falcon.
Galeweavers act as scouts for their ishkrars, and they're usually the first to see trouble. Also insatiably curious, the essences often swoop down to talk when they see travelers.
ESSENCE OF TIDES	
An essence of tides looks like a shimmering blue manta ray that glides over land as easily as through water, earning them the common name of tidedrifter. Most common along coastlines, essences of tides enjoy harmless pranks, especially against regulars who sail or swim in their waters.

With the tidedrifter's healthy sense of humor, it's not hard to win their friendship-but their relaxed demeanor evaporates if friend or family faces threat.
FIELD OF GROWTH	
The field of growth takes the form of a massive centipede made of vegetation. Often called verdant primevals, these caretakers of the natural cycle of life (and death) fight those they see as upsetting that cycle. Fields of growth seek not only to destroy undead and those who create them, but to sabotage divine servitors who casually peddle resurrection magic.
FORCE OF EARTH	
A protective earth elemental, a force of earth resembles a nine-foot-tall great ape formed of dirt and rough stone. They act as guardians and historians to their ishkrar, working tirelessly to thwart ills from befalling the group. These elementals are sometimes called earthen bulwarks.
ELEMENTAL LANGUAGES	
Most elementals speak Low Kuric. Some can use Caelian when they need to.


ELEMENTAL MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any elemental's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Elemental Swap ? 3 Malice
Two elementals on the encounter map teleport and swap places, gaining damage immunity 2 until the end of the round.Split ? 5 Malice
An elemental acting this turn cleaves themself into 2 separate elementals, splitting their current Stamina in half between them and becoming one size smaller. The elementals otherwise have the same statistics as the original. Both elementals then shift up to their speed.Convocation of Chaos (Maneuver) ? 7 Malice
Keywords Magic, Ranged
Distance Self or Ranged 8	Target Self or 1 elemental E?ect Until the end of the encounter, the target's speed increases by 5 and their strikes deal an additional 5 damage. Whenever an elemental within line of e?ect uses another convocation ability,
the target also gains the e?ects.
	

	

FORCE OF EARTH	LEVEL 3 TROOP BRUTEElemental	EV 20Stamina 132
Speed 5 (burrow)	Size 2 / Stability 2
Free Strike 6
Might +2	Agility -1	Reason 0	Intuition +1  Presence +2Slam Into Dirt (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 2	Target 2 creatures or objects
?	=11  8 damage
? 12-16  12 damage; M<1 restrained (save ends)
?	17  15 damage; M<2 restrained (save ends)
Effect The area beneath the target becomes difficult terrain.Convocation of Quartz (Maneuver)
Keywords Magic, Ranged
Distance Ranged 5	Target Self or 1 elemental
Effect The target imposes a bane on melee strikes made against them until the start of the force's next turn if they don't already have it.
3 Malice The target grows a carapace of stone, increasing their stability by 3 and granting them 15 temporary Stamina until the end of the encounter.Break Armor (Triggered Action) ? 1 Malice
Keywords -
Distance Self	Target Self
Trigger The force takes damage
Effect The force halves the damage, gains damage weakness 3, and increases their speed by 3. The damage weakness increases by 3 each time the force uses this ability in an encounter.Primordial Strength
The force deals an additional 6 damage with strikes targeting
objects.Fickle and Free
The force can't be restrained, slowed, or knocked prone, and they
ignore di?cult terrain.
ELVES, HIGH
The children of the solar celestials. The high elves were created to tend to the sun elves as librarians and heralds. They sequester themselves away from the world amid sky elf ruins, remembering a better age before the arrival of war.
GLAMOROUS

The high elves hold an unwavering poise worthy of a noble background. They also emit a glamor that allows them to take on any skin, hair, or eye color they desire. Each person sees this glamor slightly differently, emphasizing some details over others based on one's own values and fascinations.
LOREMASTERS	
The adage "knowledge is power" is a rough translation of an ancient Hyrallic saying. A closer translation might be, "knowledge before power." High elves believe knowledge is the pursuit from which all good things flow: life, power, legacy.
In their ruined towers they study ancient history and magic thought long extinct. They revive dead spells and languages and manipulate their use to suit their means. High elves can use this magic for wondrous creations. They can also use it to kill without lifting more than a few fingers.
ELEMENTAL SUMMONERS	
Through their studies of ancient magic, the high elves have cultivated a strong bond to elementals and can call upon their aid where they need it. Soot crows scout from the sky, living vine walls called brambleguards create labyrinthine barricades, and ceramic horses provide fast transport over long distances.
Most high elves have also learned to summon magical wisps called elemental motes. These sprites enervate their foes to expose them to high elf magic, and can transfer their energy into fallen elementals to revive them in a brilliant flash.
SURROUND AND SUPPRESS

Foes that threaten high elf armies are dealt with quickly and entirely. They take advantage of each other's magic to corral enemies together and throw huge waves of destruction upon them. The more exposure a victim has to high elf magic, the more effective it is in destroying them. Wyrds ensure there's no escape, warping the environment into treacherous pits and, eventually, graveyards.
MAGICAL MANIPULATION

The high elves practice a tradition of group-casting magic that empowers their abilities as more elves participate. This enables them to extend their spells further, sometimes miles away from the caster with an entire platoon working in unison.
Many high elves have also collected extensive libraries of tomes over the centuries. Even on the battlefield, an elf can

turn to a book to turn their mundane volleys into magical ones.
UNSEEN HANDS WILL ILLUMINATE THEIR UNCHANGED MINDS

Unseen Hands Will Illuminate Their Unchanged Minds are a sect of high elf radicals who believe they have stumbled upon sky elf texts detailing their downfall by the hands of the sun elves. The story surrounding their purported discoveries have twisted into a narrative decrying all modern society for benefiting from the lore accumulated in service to the sun elves. The sect hides among high elf society in plain sight, slowly manipulating nobles and reshaping the world as they see fit.
THE ORDINATOR	
Being in the presence of a high elf ordinator inspires an ancient fear in your chest. An ordinator is capable of focusing an army of high elves to precisely strike an arrow's tip from the other end of the battlefield. These spellcasters are among the most studied elves in their circles, and their strategic minds are matched only by their affinity with elementals.
The ordinator is not only an illuminating beacon of command for their platoon; they are spiritual beacon of hope for their people. Ordinators carry out their circles' will, knowledge, and power, not unlike a conduit's duty to their saint.
HIGH ELF LANGUAGES	
Most high elves speak Caelian and Hyrallic.


HIGH ELF MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any high elf's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Chaincast ? 3 Malice
Until the end of the round, whenever a high elf uses a Magic ability, they can use it as if they were occupying the space of another high elf on the encounter map to whom they have line of e?ect.Gift From an Accursed Tome (Action) (Non-minion) ? 5 Malice
Keywords Area, Magic
Distance 5  1 line within 1	Target All enemies
?	=11  5 damage; R<1 condition (save ends)
? 12-16  9 damage; R<2 condition (save ends)
?	17  12 damage; R<3 condition (save ends)
Effect The high elf chooses damage type and condition afflicted from one of the following pairs: cold and slowed, poison and weakened, or corruption and frightened of the high elf.In Defiance of Time ? 7 Malice
Until the end of the round, all high elves have their speed increased by 4. When a high elf uses an ability against an enemy, each high elf adjacent to the enemy can make a free strike against
them.
	

HIGH ELF DAWN MAGE	LEVEL 1 MINION CONTROLLERFey, High Elf, Humanoid	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 3
Speed 5	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Ranged distance +5	Free Strike 1
Might 0	Agility 0	Reason +1	Intuition +1  Presence +1Bright Bolt (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Magic, Ranged, Strike
Distance Ranged 5	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  1 holy damage
? 12-16  2 holy damage
?	17  3 holy damage
Effect The target can't hide until the start of the dawn mage's next turn.Otherworldly Grace
At the start of their turn, the dawn mage can turn the duration of
one save ends e?ect they su?er from into EoT.

HIGH ELF QUIVER	LEVEL 1 MINION ARTILLERYFey, High Elf, Humanoid	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 3
Speed 5	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Ranged distance +5	Free Strike 2
Might 0	Agility +2	Reason +1	Intuition 0	Presence 0Heavy Arrow (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Ranged 10	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage
?	17  5 damage
Effect Each ally adjacent to the target can shift 2.Otherworldly Grace
At the start of their turn, the quiver can turn the duration of one
save ends e?ect they su?er from into EoT.




	

RETAINER	

HIGH ELF WEATHERWISE	LEVEL 1 CONTROLLER RETAINERFey, High Elf, HumanoidEV 11Stamina 20Speed 5Size 1M/Stability 0Free Strike 2Might -1	Agility +1Reason +2Intuition 0	Presence +1Summer's Bolt (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Magic, Ranged, Strike,
Distance Ranged 10	Target One creature or object
?	=11  3 fire damage
? 12-16  5 fire damage
?	17+  7 fire damage
Effect If the weatherwise targets their mentor, instead of taking damage the mentor gains the same amount of Temporary Stamina.Otherworldly Grace
At the start of their turn, the weatherwise can turn the duration of
one save ends e?ect they su?er from into EoT.



ELVES, SHADOW
Long ago, the shadow elves of the manifold Equinox committed the Great Sin and for their impunity were exiled to Orden. The descendants of those elves now skulk about the World Below, searching for a means to return to their home.
IN EQUINOX'S SHADOW

Shadow elves are lit by an unseen sun. In places like Orden, they appear washed out, silhouetted, or grayscale. In Equinox, they lived in the shadow of their manifold's eternal dusk, making them incompatible with other light sources. Their skills, magic, and weapons do not fare well in the sun. However, this does allow them to blend in with existing darkness and dissolve out of sight.
MANIFOLD WEAPONRY

The shadow elves have mastered the art of combining deep, ancient magic with cutting-edge technology. The closest they've gotten to reconnecting with their home is through their manifold weapons, blades crafted of shadow that strike and wound in many dimensions at once. A creature hit by one of these blades is injured in multiple worlds at a time. Only one of strong mind can compartmentalize and end these effects on their body in the here and now.
BRUSH STALKERS

When the shadow elves were exiled from Equinox, many left on ancient beasts known as brush stalkers, quadrupedal beasts that carry entire ecosystems on their rack of antlers. Brush stalkers cannot reproduce unless they are in Equinox, so the ones who still walk with Shadow elves are old indeed: overgrown with bioluminescent moss, cracks on their ancient cloven hooves.
A brush stalker's glamor allows it to look just like a normal deer. But when the glamour is off, the creature devours the light around it and plunges its surroundings into darkness.
FRACTURED FACTIONS

Almost immediately upon arrival in The World Below, the shadow elves developed wildly different ideas for what to do about it. Some want desperately to return, while others seek to assimilate into their new home. As generations come and go, and memories of Equinox are lost to time, the shadow elves who have not yet carved a new place for themselves grow anxious.
One particularly fanatical sect has made it to Orden and mold the manifold in Equinox's image. They believe their home is lost to them forever, and their only recourse is to blot out Orden's sun and make a new one.
DUSKCALLING

Certain shadow elf warriors have a natural link to the unseen cosmos by which they are lit. With this link, a warrior can perform the Call: a mix of humming and throat singing that aligns celestial bodies across manifolds. This can temporarily induce an eclipse on the manifold in which

the Caller is performing, allowing their comrades to gain the advantage.
A skilled duskcaller can lead a band in a group Call, which is powerful enough to recreate the conditions of Equinox for a short time. Some shadow elf factions are researching this connection in earnest, considering it a viable step towards terraforming a second Equinox.
SHADOW TACTICS

Since shadow elves have no permanent home, their military strength typically emphasizes both impenetrable defense and a swift and decisive offense. Since they cannot benefit from a home advantage, all warriors are taught to create one. If there are no places to hide, create them. If the light is too bright, remove it.
In many shadow elf societies, all people are given at least basic combat training and are expected to serve at least one military tour in their life. Those who excel move on to become duskcallers, mournblades, and eclipses: paragons of strength who are venerated by the people. Research and discovery are employed for the primary purpose of furthering military goals. Even the popular children's game hide and seek is a military device created to prepare a people for constant, imminent conflict.
SHADOW ELF LANGUAGES	
Most shadow elves speak Variac and Illyvric, though platoon leaders may speak some Caelian or Hyrallic.


SHADOW ELF MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any shadow elf's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Watch Me Disappear ? 3 Malice
All shadow elves acting on this turn can hide as a free maneuver
while concealed.Extra Dimension ? 5 Malice
All shadow elves acting on this turn in?ict I<2 bleeding (save ends) or slowed (save ends) on their strikes, even if their attacks already in?ict a condition.Home is Where the Hurt Is ? 7 Malice
The shadow elves synthesize a concentrated pocket manifold
reminiscent of Equinox and graft it onto the encounter map.
Until the end of the encounter, all creatures can see shadow elves in full color, and shadow elves no longer bene?t from their Of the Umbra ability. The potency of all shadow elf abilities increases by 2, and a creature needs an 8 or higher to end a save ends e?ect in?icted by a shadow elf, as they are impacted by the condition
across two worlds.
	

SHADOW ELF DUSK MAGE	LEVEL 4 MINION HEXERFey, Humanoid, Shadow Elf	EV 12 for eight minionsStamina 7
Speed 5 (climb)	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Edge on strikes	Free Strike 2
Might +0	Agility +3	Reason +2 Intuition +0  Presence +0Gloom Strike (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target One creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage; A<2 slowed (save ends)
?	17  6 damage; A<3 slowed (save ends)Of the Umbra
The dusk mage ignores concealment granted by darkness. While the dusk mage is in direct sunlight, they have damage weakness 3.
While the dusk mage is concealed, they have damage immunity 3.
SHADOW ELF NIGHTSTRIKE	LEVEL 4 MINION AMBUSHERFey, Humanoid, Shadow Elf	EV 12 for eight minionsStamina 8
Speed 5 (climb)	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Edge on strikes	Free Strike 3
Might +1	Agility +3	Reason +0 Intuition +1  Presence +0Vault (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 2	Target One creature or object per minion
?	=11  3 damage
? 12-16  5 damage
?	17  7 damage
Effect The nightstrike leaps over the target, shifting into an unoccupied square adjacent to the target opposite from their starting position.Of the Umbra
The nightstrike ignores concealment granted by darkness. While the nightstrike is in direct sunlight, they have damage weakness 3.
While the nightstrike is concealed, they have damage immunity 3.
	



	

RETAINER	

SHADOW ELF SHADELEVEL 4 AMBUSHER RETAINERFey, Humanoid, Shadow ElfEV 23Stamina 60Speed 5 (climb)Size 1M/Stability 0Free Strike 5Might +1	Agility +2	Reason 0Intuition +2  Presence +1Shadow Dagger (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1 or Ranged 3	Target One creature or object
?	=11  6 damage
? 12-16  10 damage
?	17  13 damage
Effect When the shade starts their turn concealed from the target, gain a surge.Gathering Gloom (Maneuver, Encounter)
Keywords Area, Magic, Ranged
Distance 3 cube within 1	Target -
Effect Until the end of the next turn, the area is filled with darkness. The shade's mentor ignores concealment granted by this darkness.Of the Umbra
The shade ignores concealment granted by darkness. While the shade is in direct sunlight, they have damage weakness 3. While
the shade is concealed, they have damage immunity 3.


ELVES, WODE
Children of the Sylvan Celestials, masters of the elf-haunted forests called wodes, these elves see all forests as their domain by birthright. They know and enjoy their reputation among humans as snatching children who wander too far into the woods. Humans should fear the trees.
Their natural ability to mask their presence, called glamor, compliments their guerilla style of fighting, striking quickly from cover and then melding back into the underbrush.
These traits also make those few who dwell in human cities naturally adept at urban warfare.
HEART OF THE WODE	
The primary value of wode elf culture is respect and reverence for their home, the wode in which they live. They speak of the wode as though it is alive and conscious, dangerous and delightful. Wode elves are more receptive to strangers who respect the land they trespass upon. Those who harm it, however, ruin their one and only chance of treating peacefully with the wode's beating heart.
WODEWORKING	
Wode elves know a secret technique to use the trees of the wode to craft materials as strong as metal and to create magical constructs that act as servitor creatures, including

by any means possible. Overzealous and aggressive, the Blightless seek to expand the boundaries of their home, attacking civilizations that exist close to the forest's edge. Because Blightless attacks constitute the majority of mortal interaction with the wode elves, they set the tone for mortal perception of a mostly peaceful people.
CHIRUGEONS

When wode elves control the terrain, one of their primary strategies is divide and conquer. The chirugeons are strategists who enact their picture-perfect plans with their own hands, in the thick of battle. Enemies will never know exactly how many wode elves they're facing. Not if the crafty chirugeon can help it.
WARLEADER	
The warleader of a wode elf court is usually their finest tactician. One warleader alone can command dozens of squadrons across miles of their forests with such precision that they can appear to predict an enemy's movements without ever laying an eye on them. In times of peace, a warleader's role is primarily that of teacher, a mentor that scouts and soldiers regard almost as an additional parent.
The wode elves only send their warleader if the situation is dire. If you fight one, you should be flattered - the wode elves consider you a formidable threat.
WODE ELF LANGUAGES

their mounts. To breathe life into these creations, the wode		

elves lift their voices in song. The more intricate the song, the more durable and autonomous the creation becomes. A wodenelg's rider is typically also their singer, creating a connection between the two that can last a lifetime.
Legends tell of ancient beings, older than the forests themselves, that were sung to life by an entire wode elf civilization joined in sixteen-part harmony. They outlived their creators and roam the world as unknowable guardians who answer to nothing but their final set of instructions.
SYLVAN SURVEILLANCE

The wode elves' natural connection to the wode allows them to stay aware of the forest's goings-on while inside of it. This isn't some telepathic connection, but rather a great understanding of every corner of the wode and a hypersensitivity to changes within it. The stench of an amateur campfire, the sudden squawk of a raven, the forced march of a hungry ant colony: all of this information comes together to form a wode elf's understanding of their surroundings.
A wode elf develops this sense for their home over time, meaning that a wode elf who lives in an urban environment has just as much understanding of their neighborhood as their cousin in the forest does the trees.
BLIGHTLESS AMBITION

Not all wode elves are happy to negotiate with peaceful interlopers. Some groups view even the very presence of humans as a direct threat to their way of life. One group of scavenging parties, known as the Blightless, searches the forest for lost mortals. They seek to eliminate these threats

Most wode elves speak Caelian and Yllyric.


WODE ELF MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any wode elf's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Forest Network ? 3 Malice
Each wode elf that ends this turn hidden can shift their speed
while remaining hidden.Punishing Regrowth ? 5 Malice
Until the end of the turn, each wode elf in?icts slide 2 with their strikes and they have an edge on their abilities. If a target force moved by one of these strikes ends the forced movement in di?cult terrain, they are restrained (EoT).Vines Everywhere ? 7 Malice
Vines emerge and rapidly grow across the entire encounter map.
Each enemy must make an Agility test.
?	=11  8 damage; restrained (save ends)
? 12-16  restrained (EoT)
?	17+  no effect
	

WODE ELF RUNNER	LEVEL 1 MINION HARRIERFey, Humanoid, Wode Elf	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 4
Speed 7	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Edge on strikes	Free Strike 1
Might 0	Agility +2	Reason 0	Intuition 0	Presence +1Spear (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Charge, Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1 or Ranged 5	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  1 damage
? 12-16  2 damage
?	17  3 damage
Effect The runner can shift 2 before charging while using this ability.Masking Glamor
The runner immediately hides at the end of their turn while in
cover or concealment, even if they are observed.
WODE ELF SCOUT	LEVEL 1 MINION AMBUSHERFey, Humanoid, Wode Elf	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 4
Speed 10	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Edge on strikes	Free Strike 2
Might 0	Agility +2	Reason 0	Intuition 0	Presence +1Daggers (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1 or Ranged 5	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage
?	17  5 damageHunter's Glamor
The scout immediately hides at the end of their turn, even if they
are observed.




	

RETAINER	

WODE ELF ARROWSWIFTLEVEL 1 ARTILLERY RETAINERFey, Humanoid, Wode ElfEV 12Stamina 20Speed 7Size 1M/Stability 1Free Strike 2Might 0	Agility +2Reason 0Intuition +1	Presence 0Longshot (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - SignatureKeywords Ranged, Strike, WeaponDistance Ranged 15	Target One creature or object?	=11  4 damage? 12-16  7 damage?	17  10 damageEffect The arrowswift can take a bane to increase the attack'srange by 5.Masking Glamor
The arrowswift immediately hides at the end of their turn while in
cover or concealment, even if they are observed.



FOSSIL CRYPTIC
The cave-diving humans who first found fossil cryptics initially thought those beings were fossilized, reanimated skeletons of creatures predating recorded history. When the explorers' priest presented a holy symbol and attempted to turn the cryptics, he learned these fossilized bones aren't mindless undead-and seconds later, he wound up crushed to death by a pillar of stone.
PRIMAL SENTRIES	
In truth, these living fossil amalgamations are inhabited by elemental spirits. Fossil cryptics are found in places of otherworldly beauty with a connection to an elemental plane of Quintessence-often in caves that have remained untouched for eons or whose tunnels are laced with veins of priceless metal in exquisite fractal patterns. The elemental spirits from that plane inhabit the fossils of creatures who once protected the site, carrying on their legacy. Archaeologists, miners, and others who disturb a cryptic's domain are ground into dust and subsumed into the cryptic's own form.
BONES OF THE EARTH	
Though fossil cryptics vary wildly in their chosen shape and form, all contain a central cluster of fossils atop a churning column of rock and metal. With malleable limbs extending from their earthy core, cryptics move with unsettling speed.
ANCIENT INTELLIGENCE
Fossil cryptics often warn trespassers to leave their domains, speaking threats in ancient languages before attacking. Should trespassers persist, cryptics weaponize columns of stone at range and can manipulate the ground around them, pushing and pulling friend and foe alike into the best positions for a battle.
FOSSIL CRYPTIC LANGUAGES
Many Fossil Cryptics speak Phorialtic, but are known to use the ancient language (or languages) of the ruins they inhabit.

	

GNOLLS
Edacity. The hyena faced gnolls know only blood and hunger. These fiends carry with them the evil legacy of their late demon lord creator. Originally from the Abyssal Wasteland, gnolls quickly spread across the timescape, and they thrive in deserts, plains, and other sparsely populated places. Though a gnoll's muzzle is just as likely to be bloodied by carrion as by prey, their hunting packs hunger for violence, and they eagerly hunt travelers and raid settlements. The pack's eerie war cry, a wild cackle, presages a night of battle and terror.
BORN FROM BLOOD	
The Abyssal Waste is an alien landscape hostile to most life. Yet amidst its desolation, fiendish creatures thrive, including abyssal hyenas-blood thirsty scavengers who fight with other lesser fiends over the corpses of demons. The first gnolls arose when a pack of these predators lapped at the ichor oozing from the wounds of a dying demon prince, As'sylrak the Warper.
As his last act, the demon gave the fiendish hyenas a demonic cunning to match their insatiable hunger, bound his evil will to theirs, and turned their paws into hands so they could wield weapons. He called these new fiends "gnoll," an Abyssal word that has many meanings, one of which is "to consume completely." And true to their name, the gnolls immediately devoured their creator.
CEASELESS HUNGER

The merciless gnolls quickly spread across the timescape in search of new victims to quench their never-ending hunger. Their packs were followed by some of the abyssal hyenas who didn't receive As'sylrak's blessing; these tagalongs enjoy the castoffs of the gnoll packs. Gnolls never forgot the day when they tasted immortal flesh-and they hunger for more, longing for a day when gnolls hunt the gods themselves through heavenly halls.
GNOLL WAR

Most gnolls live for the thrill of the hunt and the taste of flesh, and they aren't choosy with their targets. Perhaps the one saving grace for most humanoid communities is that gnoll war bands battle each other for territory, keeping their numbers reduced.
ABYSSAL HYENAS	
Stronger and smarter than their beastly counterparts, abyssal hyenas crawl out of the Abyssal Wasteland to feed on corpses gnolls leave in their wake. When reinforcements are needed, gnoll spellcasters can use magic to transform abyssal hyenas into gnolls.
TUSKER DEMONS	
Towering among a gnoll war band, the elephantine tusker demon serves as beast of burden and war machine. Tusker demons have no facial features except a twisted crown of tusks that surrounds their ravening maw. Although they usually follow gnoll commands, tuskers in lethe are prone

to violent outbursts and charge at anything that moves. Enemies and allies get trampled all the same.
GNOLL LANGUAGES	
Most gnolls speak Tholl. Gnoll carnages and other older gnolls usually also know Variac.


GNOLL MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any gnoll's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Iron Jaws (Maneuver) ? 3 Malice
Keywords Area, Weapon
Distance 1 cube within 3	Target Special Effect A gnoll acting this turn drops an iron jawed snare into the affected area. The first time an enemy steps into an affected
square, they make an Agility test. If they were unaware of the snare, they make the roll with a bane.
?	=11  6 damage; bleeding (save ends)
? 12-16  4 damage; bleeding (EoT)
?	17+  no effect
Effect While an enemy is bleeding from the snare, each gnoll has an edge on strikes made against the creature.Bloodpool ? 5 Malice
1 minion gnoll suddenly explodes into a pool of blood, splattering across each square within 3. A gnoll that starts their turn in an a?ected square deals an additional 5 damage on their next strike until the end of their turn. Once per round, an abyssal hyena that starts their turn in an a?ected square turns into a gnoll marauder, keeping their Stamina.Echoes of Laughter ? 10 Malice
The battlemap is encased in a soundscape of laughter and howling. Each enemy has a bane on the ?rst power roll they make during a round. Whenever a gnoll is killed, this e?ect is suppressed
until the start of the next round.
	

GNOLL CHAINFLAIL	LEVEL 2 MINION ARTILLERYAbyssal, Gnoll	EV 8 for eight minionsStamina 4
Speed 5	Size 1M / Stability 1
With Captain Strike damage +1	Free Strike 3
Might +2	Agility 0	Reason +1	Intuition 0	Presence -2Chain Shotput (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Ranged 8	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  3 damage
? 12-16  4 damage; push 1
?	17  6 damage; push 3Death Frenzy
Whenever an ally within 5 is reduced to 0 Stamina, the chain?ail
archer moves up to their speed and makes a free strike.
GNOLL MAGE MAULER	LEVEL 2 MINION HEXERAbyssal, Gnoll	EV 8 for eight minionsStamina 4
Speed 5	Size 1M / Stability 1
With Captain Melee distance +2	Free Strike 2
Might +2	Agility +1	Reason -1	Intuition 0	Presence 0Wizard Ripper (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Magic, Melee, Strike
Distance Melee 1	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 acid damage
? 12-16  3 cold damage
?	17 5 lightning damage; target can't use magic abilities (EoT)
Effect The target has a bane on their next power roll.Death Frenzy
Whenever an ally within 5 is reduced to 0 Stamina, the mage-
gorger moves up to their speed and makes a free strike.
	



RETAINER	

GNOLL GNASHERLEVEL 2 HARRIER RETAINERFiend, GnollEV 16Stamina 40Speed 7Size 1M/Stability 1Free Strike 3Might +1	Agility +2Reason 0Intuition 0	Presence +1Gnash (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - SignatureKeywords Melee, Strike, WeaponDistance Melee 1	Target One creature or object?	=11  4 damage? 12-16  7 damage?	17  10 damage; M (strong) bleeding (save ends)Death Frenzy
Whenever an ally within 7 is reduced to 0 Stamina, the gnasher
moves up to their speed and makes a free strike.



GOBLINS
As with all humanoid ancestries, different types of goblins and goblin cultures can be found across many lands, each with their own ideals. Known among themselves as rogabrin, meaning "more of us" in their language, goblins are one of the most numerous humanoids in the world.
They can be found in every environment humans occupy and in places many other humanoids avoid, including deep cave systems.
Their long arms and prehensile toes make goblins particularly well adapted to environments requiring climbing, and they live equally comfortably in treetop cities as in subterranean realms filled with stalactites, ledges, and chasms. However, just as many prefer to dwell in tight-knit neighborhoods within diverse cities. Many of those goblins who cross swords with adventuring heroes are the worst of their society-thieves and murderers shunned by their own people.
ENCOUNTERED IN GROUPS

Whether within a society or living in exile, goblins survive and thrive because they work together. A single goblin forced into the wild is terrified. A dozen outlaw goblins are supremely confident-perhaps overly so. Such groups often become bandits who ambush travelers crossing through their territory, be it desert, forest, or underground. Larger bands might become unscrupulous mercenaries serving powerful villains. No matter how they're encountered, goblins prefer to fight as an overwhelming force and to flee when foes outnumber friends.
MOBILE AND SNEAKY

Short, lithe, and long armed, goblins are built for mobility, stealth, and climbing. Goblins who dwell in untamed wilderness and twisting caves utilize their natural agility to hide from threats and flee when found. These crafty skirmishers might run wild through battle, hacking at their enemies' knees, or unleash arrows as they dart from tree to tree.
GOBLIN MAGIC

Some exiled goblins forge pacts with evil entities for magical power, including archfey, deities, and fiends. Goblin assassins conjure darkness made from the souls of their victims, while goblin cursespitters hurl magic hexes that keep their enemies at bay.
SKITTERLING

A six-legged winged rodent the size of a housecat, a skitterling moves their clawed feet as they fly, making them appear to scurry through the air. Goblins train these pets to claw at the faces of enemies, as their feet secrete a toxin that causes temporary sluggishness.
WAR SPIDER

Goblins ride enormous arachnids as mounts in battle. With blades attached to their legs, a war spider cuts a swath through enemy forces while archers fire from atop a platform on the beast's back. During a raid, a spider arches

their body to launch warriors off their back and into the fray.
WARG	
Some goblins form a special bond with wargs-canine creatures that many goblin communities raise as mounts, guardians, and companions.
GOBLIN LANGUAGES

Most goblins speak Caelian and Szetch.


GOBLIN MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any goblin's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Goblin Mode ? 3 Malice
Each goblin in the encounter gains a +2 bonus to speed until the
end of the round.Tiny Stabs ? 5 Malice
Each enemy in the encounter takes 1 damage for each goblin adjacent to them.Swamp Stink ? 7 Malice
The encounter map becomes covered in a green mist that lasts until the end of the round, and which can't be dispersed by wind. All areas of the map become di?cult terrain for non-goblins, and each non-goblin on the map must make a Might test.
?	=11  5 poison damage; weakened until mist disappears
? 12-16  Weakened until mist disappears
?	17+  No effect
	


GOBLIN SNIPER	LEVEL 1 MINION ARTILLERYGoblin, Humanoid	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 3
Speed 5 (climb)	Size 1S / Stability 0
With Captain Ranged distance +5	Free Strike 2
Might -2	Agility +2	Reason +0	Intuition +0  Presence -1Bow (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Ranged 10	Target One creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage
?	17+  5 damage
Effect If the sniper doesn't use a move action this turn, the ability has an edge.Crafty
The sniper doesn't provoke opportunity attacks by moving.
GOBLIN SPINECLEAVER	LEVEL 1 MINION BRUTEGoblin, Humanoid	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 5
Speed 5 (climb)	Size 1S / Stability 0
With Captain Strike damage +1	Free Strike 2
Might +2	Agility +0	Reason +0	Intuition +0  Presence -1Axe (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target One creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage; push 1
? 12-16  4 damage; push 3
?	17+  5 damage; push 4Crafty
The spinecleaver doesn't provoke opportunity attacks by moving.
	


	

	

RETAINER	

GOBLIN GUIDE	LEVEL 1 HARRIER RETAINERGoblin, Humanoid	EV 13Stamina 30
Speed 5 (climb)	Size 1S/Stability 0
Free Strike 2
Might -1	Agility +1	Reason 0	Intuition 0	Presence +1Stabbity Stab (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target 1 creature or object
?	=11  3 damage
? 12-16  5 damage
?	17+  7 damage
Effect The target can't make opportunity attacks until the end of the guide's turn.Crafty
The guide doesn't provoke opportunity attacks by moving.



GRIFFONS
With the head, front legs, and wings of a bird and the powerful body and haunches of a feline, the griffon hunts anything they desire-even other predators-though they prefer to eat birds, fish, and herd. Griffons sometimes misjudge their prey and attack humanoids passing through their mountain or forest territories. They also fiercely defend themselves against anyone who threatens or gets too close to their nests.
COVETED MOUNTS
Attempting to capture a wild griffon typically ends in injury or worse, though humanoids who hatch griffons in captivity and raise them from birth find they make loyal companions. Some humanoid cultures raise griffons as mounts for the military or city guard, and griffon eggs can fetch a fine price.
Daring poachers sometimes attempt to steal griffon eggs from wild aeries, but such thieves typically meet their end by griffon beak or talon. So great is the death toll that many localities have outlawed the poaching of griffon eggs.
INACCESSIBLE AERIES	
Griffons roost alone or in pairs on craggy mountainsides, in forests, or on cliffs overlooking the ocean. They hide their nests in enormous treetops, scrubby thickets clinging to a cliff, or similarly sheltered nooks that are nearly unreachable for creatures who can't fly. Each aerie holds up to three eggs during brooding season, which lasts for several months in the early spring. Chicks hatch after forty days of incubation, then they remain in or near the nest as their parents feed the rapidly growing flightless chick.
About forty days after hatching, a griffon chick learns to fly-and after that, it's only a matter of days before they set out from their nest into the wider world, generally making their own nest somewhere nearby.
RARE BREEDS
Griffons come in many varieties. While the most common griffon is the leonine eagle, others include a falcon-panther variety and a bearded vulture-clouded leopard variety. The latter only feeds on carrion, and experts continue to debate whether they should be considered a true griffon or if they deserve their own categorization. Rumors of a massive condor-tiger griffon have recently sprung up, and whether or not their existence is true, it has opened questions of whether these creatures came about naturally or were fashioned by magic hands. Still, many scholars offer abundant rewards to adventurers who can return with evidence of rare or undiscovered griffon types.

	

HAG
When fear of death or hunger for power grips a mortal spellcaster, often a druid or a witch, they might forge a pact with an evil archfey. The mortal becomes a hag-aged, clawed, and cruel-another ruthlessly powerful fey in their own right. In exchange, hags use their magic to bring about the misery that their archfey wills.
HIDING IN PLAIN SIGHT
Though hags typically appear as older humanoid women, their true form is as vicious and nasty as their nature. They prefer to show the world a charitable face, but the general wisdom concerning hags is that the more beautiful their appearance, the deeper the rot within. However, this theory has never been confirmed, as few who see a hag's true form live to tell the tale.
DEALMAKERS AND HEART-BREAKERS
As old age can't kill them, the oldest hags accumulate swathes of knowledge, magic, and repute over time. They are happy to share their wares ... for the right price. Rather than ask for paltry coin, a hag usually bargains for something dear to the customer-perhaps their ability to love, the sound of their child's laugh, or their left pinky toe.
Adding insult to injury, those who deal with hags almost always discover the product is worse than advertised. Mortals should pay close attention to the precise wording of their agreements, lest they end up with a hex they thought would be a gift. Such curses often lead to the corruption of good but desperate folk, and some get so twisted up in fey deals that they become hags themselves.
WHAT'S IN A NAME?	
Hags give themselves whimsical names, and older hags often select monikers like Auntie, Granny, or Nanny. Such relatable names help entice their favorite prey: the innocent. Who would fear Granny Gumdrops or Auntie Twothumbs?
LOYAL UNDERLINGS
Hags are treacherous by nature, and they only recruit creatures they trust to be loyal underlings. Most of these creatures lack sapience (such as animals, constructs, and undead), though hags sometimes command weaker fey who are too scared to betray them.
HAG LANGUAGES
Most hags speak Caelian, Anjali, Khelt, and Yllyric, but often go on to learn several more.


HAG MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of a hag's turn, you can spend malice to activate one of
the following features.Casting Curses and Bodies ? 3 Malice
The hag utters terrible words that push each enemy within 2
squares of her up to 3 squares.Hag Wyrd (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? 5 Malice
	

HOBGOBLINS
Also known as demogoblins, hobgoblins descend from ancient goblins who made a pact with an infernal power in exchange for increased size and strength. Each hobgoblin has fang-like tusks, and one or more horns protrude from their head.
Like other humanoids, hobgoblins have no special inclination toward conquest, battle, or cruelty, and they can be found in all walks of life. But when the wicked among them fall on desperate times, some use their talents for the violence and subjugation of others.
SYNERGIZED TACTICS	
Hobgoblin magic and talents complement one another in a fight. Wise commanders put these strategies to good use and scout the battlefield before combat to gain every advantage. Thanks to their emphasis on tactics, hobgoblin armies are often second to none.
PLAYING WITH FIRE	
The infernal heritage of hobgoblins allows them to live in extreme heat that many other humanoids can't tolerate. Hobgoblins often settle in deserts, tropics, and other hot areas. Their heritage also allows them to bend fire to their will, and many choose professions that make use of fire, such as smithing or glassblowing.
INNATE MAGIC

Infernal magic runs through the veins of every hobgoblin, though their gifts vary. Many can harness the power of fire or corruptive energy, while others can turn allies invisible or run like Hell.
BINDING BARGAINS

Many hobgoblins still hold to the infernal concept of being true to their word when entering into agreements. Even spoken contracts are considered unbreakable, and hobgoblin communities scorn any creature-hobgoblin or otherwise-who degrades themself by breaking their word.
GRILP	
The grilp-a green-skinned devil about the size of a housecat-can change the color and texture of their skin to blend in with their surroundings. They often serve as scouts, spies, messengers, and errand-runners for high- ranking hobgoblins. Beyond these covert skills, however, hobgoblins value grilps most highly for their magic-laced saliva, which weakens the defenses of other creatures.
SLAUGHTER DEMON	
When evil hobgoblins who embrace their fiendish heritage need to wipe an enemy off the map, their war mages ritualistically beseech an archdevil for the service of a grack'tanar, known as a slaughter demon in the Common tongue. Once summoned, this towering, serpent-bodied, six-clawed demon slithers to war alongside the hobgoblins who summoned them.

Devils captured the grack'tanars eons ago. Broken, these demons wait for a call to war, hungry and frothing in the Seven Cities of Hell. Their archdevil captors reward loyal hobgoblins by allowing the mortals to hold a grack'tanar's reins for a time. These slaughter demons are eager to kill and please their captors so they might be sent out again, and they rarely turn on hobgoblins unless they fall into lethe.
HOBGOBLIN LANGUAGES	
Most hobgoblins speak Caelian, Anjali and Szetch.


HOBGOBLIN MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any hobgoblin's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Goblin Malice Features ? X Malice
The hobgoblin activates a malice feature available to goblins.Operation Goblin Mode ? 3 Malice
Each goblin in the encounter gains a +3 bonus to speed until the
end of the round.Operation Tactical Swarm ? 5 Malice
All hobgoblins shift up to their speed and take the Defend action.Operation Earthsear ? 7 Malice
The ground throughout the encounter map becomes blazing hot until the end of the round. An enemy takes 1 ?re damage for each a?ected square they enter. An enemy that ends their turn in an a?ected square has ?re weakness 2 until the start of their next
turn.
	

HOBGOBLIN BRANDBEARER	LEVEL 4 MINION HEXERGoblin, Hobgoblin, Humanoid, Infernal	EV 12 for eight minionsStamina 7	Immunity fire 2
Speed 5	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Edge on strikes	Free Strike 2
Might 0	Agility +1	Reason +2	Intuition 0	Presence +3Searing Grasp (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? Signature
Keywords Magic, Melee, Strike
Distance Melee 1	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 fire damage
? 12-16  4 fire damage; M<2 fire weakness 5 (save ends)
?	17  6 fire damage; M<3 fire weakness 5 (save ends)Open Furnace
An enemy that takes ?re damage receives 1 additional ?re damage
for each adjacent brandbearer.Infernal Ichor
If the brandbearer's Stamina drops to 0, they spray burning blood.
Each creature within 1 of the brandbearer takes 2 ?re damage.
HOBGOBLIN LANCER	LEVEL 4 MINION HARRIERGoblin, Hobgoblin, Humanoid, Infernal	EV 12 for eight minionsStamina 8	Immunity fire 2
Speed 7	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Strike damage +2	Free Strike 2
Might +1	Agility +2	Reason 0	Intuition +2	Presence 0Grim Thrust (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 2 or Ranged 5	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 corruption damage
? 12-16  4 corruption damage; push 1
?	17  6 corruption damage; push 2
Effect The lancer deals an additional 2 damage if they strike the target from 1 or more squares above.Infernal Ichor
If the lancer's Stamina drops to 0, they spray burning blood. Each
creature within 1 of the lancer takes 2 ?re damage.




	

HOBGOBLIN BLOODLORDLEVEL 6 LEADERGoblin, Hobgoblin, Humanoid, InfernalEV 32Stamina 180Immunity fire 6Speed 6 (teleport)Size 1M / Stability 2Free Strike 7Might +4	Agility +2	Reason +2Intuition +3  Presence +3Soul Sword (Action) ? 2d10 + 4 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target Two creatures or objects
?	=11  11 corruption damage; P<2 bleeding (save ends)
? 12-16  16 corruption damage; P<3 bleeding (save ends)
?	17  19 corruption damage; P<4 bleeding (save ends) 2 Malice Each target is marked until they die or the end of the
encounter. Allies have an edge on strikes against marked targets. The bloodlord can only have up to 3 targets marked this way, removing the oldest mark first.Take Point! (Maneuver)
Keywords -
Distance Ranged 10	Target 1 ally
Effect The target moves up to their speed and uses a signature action.An Army From Blood (Triggered Action) ? 3 Malice
Keywords -
Trigger The target takes damage
Distance Ranged 10	Target 1 non-minion hobgoblin
Effect 3 hobgoblin recruits crawl out of the target's blood and appear in unoccupied spaces adjacent to the target.Infernal Ichor
If the bloodlord's Stamina drops to 0, they spray burning blood.
Each creature within 1 of the bloodlord takes 3 ?re damage.End Effect
At the end of their turn, the bloodlord can take 10 damage to end one save ends e?ect a?ecting them. This damage can't be reduced in any way.Advance! (Villain Action 1)
Keywords Area
Distance Self and 10 burst	Target Self and all allies
Effect Each target gains 10 temporary Stamina, moves up to their speed, and makes a free strike.Skulls Abound (Villain Action 2)
Keywords Area, Magic, Melee
Distance 3 aura	Target Self
Effect The bloodlord surrounds themselves with a storm of flying skulls until the end of the encounter. An enemy that first enters the aura or starts their turn there takes 8 corruption damage and has a bane on their next power roll until the start of their next turn.I am Fire! I am Death! (Villain Action 3) ? 2d10 + 4
Keywords Area, Magic, Melee
Distance 5 burst	Target All enemies in the burst
?	=11  5 fire damage; P<2 2 fire damage; push 2, prone
? 12-16  5 fire damage; P<3 7 fire damage; push 3, prone
?	17 5 fire damage; P<4 10 fire damage; push 5, prone Effect The bloodlord is wreathed in black flames until the end of
the encounter. When an adjacent enemy touches or uses a melee ability against the bloodlord, they take 5 corruption
damage.
RETAINER	

HOBGOBLIN FLAMESLINGER	LEVEL 4 CONTROLLER RETAINERGoblin, Hobgoblin, Humanoid, InfernalEV 20Stamina 50Immunity fire 4Speed 5Size 1M/Stability 0Free Strike 5Might +1	Agility 0	Reason +2Intuition +1  Presence +3Fire Curse (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Magic, Ranged, Strike
Distance Ranged 10	Target One creature or object
?	=11  5 fire damage
? 12-16  9 fire damage
?	17  12 fire damage; A (strong) burning (save ends) E?ect A burning target takes 1d6 ?re damage at the start of each of their turns until the condition ends.Fuel for the Fire (Action)
Keywords -
Distance Ranged 10	Target 1 creature E?ect The target gains ?re weakness 10 until the end of the ?ameslinger's next turn. If the target is the ?ameslinger's mentor, they instead gain ?re immunity 10.Infernal Ichor
If the ?ameslinger's Stamina drops to 0, they spray burning blood.
Each creature within 1 of the ?ameslinger takes 3 ?re damage.


HUMANS
Humans flourish in every habitable part of the world, from inviting coastal cities to unforgiving mountainous terrain. While most humans live quietly in peaceful communities, some are drawn to adventure by an unquenchable thirst for excitement or power.
VILLAINS AND HEROES

Recognizing their limited lifespan, humans often set their eyes on immortality. They unfurl empires at the tip of a sword, sacrifice lives to erect grand monuments, and even aspire to godhood, all in hopes their names will be remembered forever.
Violence and greed are close cousins in the human family. Those with power and wealth often strive for more by the sword. Others turn to theft, often driven to desperation by rapacious neighbors. Travelers in human lands are likely to encounter robbers and barons-both exact a toll.
Other humans pursue power more subtly, turning their cunning toward selfish ends. When ambitions exceed circumstances, there is always some ancient evil power to call on. Cultists seek dark desires in exchange for service, sacrificing to forbidden gods and courting apocalypse.
Fortunately, many humans devote themselves to righting wrongs and reshaping the world for the better. Heroes plunge themselves into danger time and time again, standing against natural and supernatural perils in pursuit of justice.
RISKS AND REWARDS

Humans devote as much attention to games and gambling as to more serious pursuits. Perhaps this competitive training explains their renowned knack for seizing the moment-knowing when to risk it all on a throw of the dice. Whether in sport or battle, humans quickly spot their opponent's mistakes and seize the advantage.
Humans see unrealized potential everywhere, whether envisioning an untamed forest transformed into a prosper- ous village or an ancient dungeon yielding a chest full of coins. Pursuing such ambitions might end in catastrophe, but for these gamblers, it's a game worth playing.
SWORDS FOR HIRE

With an appetite for warfare and gold, human adventurers are well represented in most mercenary bands. A human mercenary makes a stout ally... if you can afford their price.
CONNECTED TO THE NATURAL WORLD

Humans are connected to the natural world in a way that other species are not. As such, they have an uncanny knack for detecting when nearby creatures, objects, and phenomena are created by magic and psionics. This same sense allows them to resist supernatural abilities and effects.

HUMAN LANGUAGES	
Most humans speak Caelian and one Vaslorian human language.


HUMAN MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any human's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
 of the following features.	
Alchemical Device (Maneuver) (Non-minion) ? 3 Malice
Keywords Area, Magic, Ranged
Distance 3 cube within 10	Target Each enemy in the cube
?	=11  4 corruption damage; A<0 slowed (save ends)
? 12-16  6 corruption damage; A<1 slowed (save ends)
?	17+  9 corruption damage; A<2 restrained (save ends)Exploit Opening ? 5 Malice
Until the end of their turn, each human acting this turn has an edge on their abilities, or a double edge if their ability targets an enemy a?ected by a condition.Staying Power ? 7 Malice
Each non-minion human in the encounter regains Stamina equal
to 5 times their level.
	

	



	

RETAINER	

HUMAN WARRIORLEVEL 1 DEFENDER RETAINERHuman, HumanoidEV 15Stamina 40Speed 5Size 1M/Stability 0Free Strike 2Might +2	Agility 0Reason 0Intuition 0	Presence +1Chop (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target One creature or object
?	=11  3 damage
? 12-16  5 damage
?	17+  7 damage
Effect The attack gains an edge if the warrior is adjacent to their mentor.Supernatural Insight
The warrior ignores concealment if it's granted by a supernatural
e?ect, or if the target is supernatural.



KOBOLDS
Kobold communities, called legions, are found in every biome and across the timescape. Gravitating toward powerful allies and defensible locations, kobolds are equally common in walled cities, secluded temples, subterranean tunnel-mazes, and dragon lairs. Most legions strive to be good neighbors or to go entirely unnoticed, but when a community falls under the sway of a malevolent wyrm or power-hungry centurion, they pose a significant threat.
DEFENSIVE MASTERS

In a world filled with bigger, hungrier creatures, kobolds survived by becoming experts in collective defense. Kobold shield tactics are legendary; every warrior carries a shield into battle, and soldiers defend each other in tightly choreographed formations. More than a tool, a kobold's shield is a symbol of their commitment to defending their legion, and they decorate these treasured possessions with battle trophies and illustrations of great deeds.
Kobold legionaries may join worthy adventurers as retainers, lending their defensive prowess to their new allies as they ko-boldly go where no kobold has gone before.
UNCONVENTIONAL TACTICS	
Relentless innovators, kobolds can easily outsmart anyone who doesn't take them seriously. Their foes haven't experienced a true kobold battle until they survive exploding javelins or flaming nets. Kobold homes are protected with deadly hazards and ambush points. In open warfare, legions deploy mechanical dragons and flaming spike pit traps.
TINY DRAGONS	
Most kobolds believe their ancestors were created by powerful dragons-and with sharp, angular features and prominent dorsal crests, they certainly look the part!
Newborn kobolds have brilliant, pearlescent scales; as kobolds age, their scales dim and mottle. Owing to a deep magical connection, a legion that lives in the domain of a dragon adopts the color of that dragon's scales over several generations.
DOMAIN EXPANSION	
When kobolds settle into the domain of a dragon, they become more like that dragon in more than just color. Some groups worship the dragon like a god. Others revere them as a leader or ancestor, or admire them like a really (REALLY) big brother. This manifests as a desire to understand the dragon's affinity so as to embody it.
Kobolds see themselves as an extension of that domain, working with and for it. Meteor kobolds, for example, may rely more on hanging traps. Bloodthirsty omen kobolds deny themselves material pleasures and may end up wasting away into little more than skeletons. It has been speculated that kobolds living inside a domain do influence the size and strength of the dragon's hold on the territory.



TERRAIN MASTERY	
All of this - the kobolds' innovative spirit, affinity for their terrain, group defenses, and creative tactics - makes a kobold legion the master of the area in which they live.
While they employ traps and tricks of their own creations, they also know the ins and outs of nature's traps. For example, a sagittarius might shoot at a nearby hive of angry bees instead of their opponent. If your kobold opponents retreat over a frozen lake or desert sands, don't give chase; they likely know something about these terrain hazards that you do not.
KOBOLD LANGUAGES	
Most kobolds speak Kethaic and can understand Caelian.


KOBOLD MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any kobold's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Maniple Tactics ? 3 Malice
Up to 3 kobolds make a free strike, swaps positions with an
adjacent kobold, and then that kobold makes a free strike.               Set the Initiative ? 7 Malice Two kobolds take their turns in a row.Shield Wall ? 7 Malice
Until the end of the round, all kobolds with Shield? Shield! Impose
an additional bane on incoming strikes and abilities.
	

KOBOLD SAGITTARION	LEVEL 1 MINION ARTILLERYHumanoid, Kobold	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 3
Speed 5	Size 1S / Stability 0
With Captain Ranged distance +5	Free Strike 2
Might 0	Agility +2	Reason 0	Intuition 0	Presence 0Composite Bow (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Attack, Ranged, Weapon
Distance Ranged 10	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage
?	17  5 damage
Effect The sagittarius has an edge on this ability while adjacent to an ally.Shield? Shield!
The sagittarius has cover, a Stability of 1, and can act as cover for
allies when adjacent to an ally who also has this trait.
KOBOLD TIRO	LEVEL 1 MINION DEFENDERHumanoid, Kobold	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 5
Speed 5	Size 1S / Stability 0
With Captain Speed +1	Free Strike 1
Might 0	Agility +2	Reason 0	Intuition 0	Presence 0Pugio (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target 1 creature or object per minion
?	=11  1 damage
? 12-16  2 damage; shift 1
?	17  3 damage; shift 2
Effect The tiro slices the target with their dagger. The target can't shift until the start of the tiro's next turn.Shield? Shield!
The tiro has cover, a Stability of 1, and can act as cover for allies
when adjacent to an ally who also has this trait.
	


	


SHIELDSCALE DRANGOLINLEVEL 1 TROOP BRUTEAnimal, KoboldEV 12Stamina 80Speed 7 (burrow)Size 3 / Stability 0Free Strike 5Might +2	Agility +1Reason -3Intuition 0	Presence -2Fiery Claws (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? SignatureKeywords Melee, Strike, WeaponDistance Melee 1	Target 2 creatures or objects?	=11  7 fire damage? 12-16  10 fire damage?	17  13 fire damageDrangolin Plume (Action) ? 5 Malice
Keywords -
Distance Self	Target Self
Effect The drangolin shifts their speed and uses Fiery Claws against each creature who comes within 1 during the move. The drangolin makes one power roll against all targets.Erupt (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? 3 Malice
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance 2 burst (while burrowing)	Target All creatures
?	=11  6 damage; push 1; A<0 prone
? 12-16  8 damage; push 3; A<1 prone
?	17  11 damage; push 5; A<2 prone
Effect This attack deals an additional 2 fire damage against targets directly above the dragonlin.Ash Shot
Each enemy adjacent to the drangolin has a bane on strikes and
can't be hidden.
RETAINER	

KOBOLD SHIELDBEARERLEVEL 1 DEFENDER RETAINERHumanoid, KoboldEV 15Stamina 40Speed 5Size 1S/Stability 0Free Strike 2Might +2	Agility +1Reason 0Intuition 0	Presence 0Gladius (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - SignatureKeywords Melee, Strike, WeaponDistance Melee 1	Target One creature or object?	=11  3 damage? 12-16  5 damage?	17  7 damage; taunted (EoT)Shield, Boss?
The shieldbearer and their mentor has cover, their Stability increased by 1, and can act as cover for allies when the
shieldbearer is adjacent to their mentor.



LIGHTBENDERS
Lightbenders prowl deserts, plains, forests-any sunbathed wilderness. Their adaptations make them skilled daylight predators. This monstrous creature's fur bends and refracts light from the surrounding environment, producing mirages that distract and confuse their prey-hence their name.
HIDDEN HUNTERS
At a distance, a lightbender looks akin to a regular lion, but closer inspection reveals their glowing eyes, iridescent mane, and pair of lashing tails spiked with refractive crystals. The lightbender's pelt magically warps light around them to disguise their movement, allowing them to teleport while leaving behind a past visual imprint.
Unsuspecting prey rarely realize they're staring at an afterimage of the lightbender until the predator pounces.
PRIZED MANES
Both male and female lightbenders have the distinctive mane, which is highly prized for its light-displacing qualities and can be fashioned into a mantle of the lightbender, though only a few mages possess
the knowledge to do so.
PROTECTIVE COMPANIONS
Though lightbenders are typically solitary creatures, they sometimes cross into another lightbender's territory to help protect a newborn litter of kittens. A few people have succeeded in taming lightbenders as guards or hunting animals, and if treated well, they can make for loyal protectors, often viewing their smaller humanoid companions as surrogate kittens.


LIGHTBENDER MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any lightbender's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Silent Prowl ? 3 Malice
A lightbender acting this turn adds the teleport keyword to their movement and can hide as a free maneuver until the start of their next turn.Duplicate ? 5 Malice
A lightbender acting this turn creates a duplicate lightbender in an unoccupied space adjacent to them. The duplicate has 1 Stamina and shares the lightbender's speed and turn. Once per round, the lightbender can instantly trade places with a duplicate before or after using an ability.Everything The Light Touches ? 7 Malice
All lightbenders in the encounter shine radiantly and distort the senses of each enemy within 5 of one. Each a?ected enemy makes a Reason test.
?	=11 The target can't establish line of effect with any lightbenders (save ends)
? 12-16 The target can't establish line of effect with any lightbenders (EoT)
?	17  no effect
	

LIZARDFOLK
Lizardfolk prefer warm, tropical climates, but they're willing to settle in any humid region-the more moisture in the air, the better. Even in colder climates, lizardfolk can be found in any sufficiently marshy environment. Bogs and wetlands are particularly common nesting grounds.
Their scales protect both against weapons and the moisture in their native environments. Coloring and hue vary wildly with environment and diet.
HOMELAND PROTECTORS
Lizardfolk aren't especially hostile unless they feel their territory is threatened-which it often is. However, respectful travelers entering lizardfolk territory find no great hardship. Lizardfolk cultures often take up a specific trade, like boatmaking, fletching, weaving, or navigating, and they sell their services to travelers in need, including lizardfolk from other places.
Adventurers cross paths with lizardfolk while trekking through their homelands. The reptilian humanoids watch travelers who skirt too close to sources of food and shelter, attacking those who take more than they need. Many lizardfolk dwell in caverns and abandoned ruins for protection. Treasure-seekers who delve into these places are typically given one warning before the attack begins.
FOCUSED AND LOYAL	
Most lizardfolk speak plainly, viewing blunt honesty as a sign of respect. When they make a vow or personal promise, they do all they can to honor that word. Lizardfolk who swear to destroy an enemy follow their quarry to the ends of the earth.
MARSHLAND TYRANTS	
In times of crisis, such as a food shortage, an evil lizardfolk leader can exploit the emergency, oppressing others in the name of defending their territory. But there are always other local lizardfolk tribes who oppose such aggressive, expansionist posturing; they often seek the aid of others who value freedom from tyranny.
LIZARDFOLK LANGUAGES	
Most lizardfolk speak Caelian and Khamish.



	

MANTICORE
A weary traveler hears a clarion call through the forest or friendly voices from a rocky shelter, and their heart leaps at the promise of refuge-only to find themself at the mercy of serrated teeth and poisoned spikes. In a manticore's territory, people go missing without a trace. These fearsome creatures carve out their hunting grounds in forests near small villages, mountain passes where caravans travel, and other locations with plentiful wildlife. While manticores can subsist on a carnivorous diet of any nearby prey, their choicest meal is humanoid flesh.
UNCANNY APPEARANCES	
A manticore has a lion's body, a dragon's wings, and a scorpion's tail barbed with spines, but their most unnerving trait is their humanoid face. Owing to a quirk of magical evolution, manticores develop the features of common ancestries that populate their region of birth. For example, a manticore in an area densely populated by devils inherits fiendish eyes and devilish horns. Manticores are born with an inherent understanding of a regional language, but they can speak only through mimicking that which they've heard-a talent manticores use to lure in prey.
HERALDS OF DEATH	
Manticores have a magical howl like a trumpet. This haunting sound not only terrifies creatures, but makes them more susceptible to the manticore's bite. While on the hunt, manticores often take to the skies, shooting poison- tipped spikes from their tail to weaken their victims before howling and closing in.
FEROCIOUS COMPANIONS	
A manticore who develops a taste for humanoids can rarely be tamed. But a young manticore who has yet to cut their teeth on such flesh can be raised into a fearsome ally. After a trained manticore companion finally tastes delicious humanoid flesh, they typically remain loyal to their caregiver.
MANTICORE LANGUAGES	
Most manticores can mimic Caelian and one language commonly spoken in the region they dwell in. Outside of a rare few, manticores are not intelligent enough to communicate in full sentences and are too driven by hunger to engage in negotiations.


MANTICORE MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of a manticore's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Uncanny Mimicry ? 3 Malice
The manticore uses their mimicry to unnerve a creature they have line of e?ect to. The target R<4 has a bane on power rolls made against the manticore (save ends). The potency of this feature decreases by 2 when it's used against the same target.Desperate Howl ? 5 Malice
The manticore lets out an unnerving cry. Each enemy within 3
of the manticore makes an Intuition test.
	

MEDUSA
Hunted as monsters with no thought given to their nature or origin, few creatures are as underestimated and misunderstood as medusas. Many people fear medusas for their monstrous appearance and ability to turn others to stone, but few realize the truth. Each of these monstrosities

allows them to slip between their statues, hide, and then strike, it also allows them to command the battlefield of stone, shattering statues to harm others. Some may slowly unpetrify their victims, one limb at a time, to feed on them, creating grotesque mausoleums of the dead for unwitting adventurers to wander into.
LIFTING THE CURSE

was once a humanoid, cursed and transformed for defying a		

god-but while some medusas embrace wickedness, others simply fight for their lives against ignorant hunters.
CURSED FOR DEFIANCE	
When a powerful mortal defies a god for good or for ill, the deity may curse them to live as a medusa. The offender's skin and eyes become reptilian, and a nest of black venomous snakes replaces their hair. When the medusa wishes, beams from their eyes can slowly petrify others to stone.
The gods who use this punishment spread terrifying myths about medusas, causing mortals to attack and shun them. This often drives medusas into solitude-or to places haunted by creatures who don't judge them based on mere appearance and horror stories. Many plot ways to break their curse, searching for lost healing rituals or secrets to use against the gods who cursed them. Others embrace their new gifts, building stone gardens of victims who foolishly hunted or harmed them.

SERPENTINE REFLEXES

While the medusa's stone gaze is legendary, they also can move, strike, and evade as swiftly as a snake, even briefly manifesting scaled wings to dart through the chaos. This enhanced dexterity makes them difficult to pin down.

They can fire beams from their eyes, allowing them to attack at range as necessary, but they're deadly in melee, where they have the full advantage of their snakes and the enervating venom pulsing through each set of needlelike fangs.
BALEFUL MAGIC

Medusas have many means to defend themselves, even aside from their petrifying stare. They slow enemies down, weaken them, and-once their petrifying magic has rooted itself in their foes-temporarily charm and control their enemies. These reclusive beings are no stranger to being outnumbered and overwhelmed; all they have in their power to gain leverage over their opponents, they wield ruthlessly.
STONE GARDENS

Medusas often reside in stone gardens filled with statues of those who previously tried to slay them. This not only

The deity who inflicted a medusa's curse can rarely be convinced to lift the punishment, usually by undertaking an impossible task in the god's name or making a threat they can't ignore. Some sages claim ancient rituals can undo a god's curse, but these lost secrets are hidden by wrathful divine servants-and performing such a ritual would almost certainly entail great sacrifice.
MEDUSA LANGUAGES	
Medusas can speak any language they knew before they were cursed. Many of them speak Caelian, and others still have learned the languages of monsters and creatures they dwell near-many tales tell of medusas who speak the original form of Khamish.


MEDUSA MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of a medusa's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Weakening Glare (Action) ? 2d10 + 4 ? 3 Malice
Keywords Magic, Ranged, Strike
Distance Ranged 10	Target One creature
?	=11  6 damage; weakened (EoT)
? 12-16  10 damage; weakened (EoT)
?	17+  12 damage; weakened (save ends)Ssstop and Lisssten (Action) ? 2d10 + 4 ? 5 Malice
Keywords Ranged, Magic
Distance Ranged 10	Target Three creatures
?	=11  I<2 charmed
? 12-16  I<3 charmed
?	17+  I<4 charmed
Effect A charmed creature moves up to their speed and makes a free strike against an enemy of medusa's choice as a free triggered action, and then is no longer charmed.Shatter Victims ? 7 Malice
The medusa causes three stone statues on the map within 10 to shatter in a 2-square-by-2-square explosion. Each enemy occupying an a?ected square makes a Might test. A target a?ected by the Medusa's Petrify ability has a double bane on the test as the growing stone within them painfully reverberates.
?	=11  12 damage; vertical push 2; bleeding
? 12-16  10 damage; vertical push 1
?	17  6 damage
	

MINOTAURS
The fearsome minotaur is a study in contrasts. Their imposing humanoid body is muscular with patches of thick hair. Their head is that of a massive horned bull, and their soft eyes convey a soulful intelligence mingled with smoldering intensity.
PRIMAL RAGE
Minotaurs burn with fury. Some constantly desire to unleash this destructive energy on the world, and they attack anyone or anything that crosses their path. Others make it a point of pride to control their rage, only fighting when survival demands it.
Regardless, once combat begins, minotaurs relish charging at foes with their great horns. In the heat of battle, a minotaur charges from one foe to the next, only retreating if victory is entirely impossible.
LABYRINTHINE ORIGINS	
The first minotaur was once the human warrior Thesia "The Bull" Danaria, who dared challenge the Beast Lords of Kham. When her revolution was crushed, the Lords of Kham used their beastmagics to twist Thesia's mortal body into a human-bull hybrid prone to fits of violent rage. The Beast Lords placed this minotaur at the center of a vast labyrinth and sent captured rebels to attack the monster. Many fell to Thesia's anger-until a prisoner named Velathri took a chance, speaking to the minotaur instead of brandishing steel. He befriended Thesia, and in retribution, the Beast Lords made him a minotaur as well. This act was their undoing, for Thesia and Velathri fell in love. New minotaurs were born, and decades later, hundreds charged out of the maze together. These minotaurs reduced Kham to ruins, then they spread far and wide, fearing reprisal from neighboring lands. Even today, many minotaurs shun civilization, preferring to live in winding canyons, twisting ruins, bewildering dungeons, or other maze-like terrain where they can continue to hunt. However, a few can be found in nearly any terrain or settlement.
DEEP BONDS
Even evil minotaurs can be fiercely loyal friends, gladly charging into certain death for those they trust. These chosen friends never suffer the creature's ire- but gods help them if they betray the minotaur.
MINOTAUR LANGUAGES	
Most minotaurs speak Khamish.

	

RETAINER	

OGRES
Massive and bull-necked with bulging muscle and flesh, most ogres indulge their every impulse because few can stop them. Though small for giants, ogres still outweigh and tower over humanoids. Most live in the wild where they can create their own rules and ways of life.
EXTREME EMOTIONS
Most ogres experience emotions at their extremes. Rarely are they simply bemused or cross; you're more likely to find an ogre leaping with ecstatic joy over a trivial victory or screaming with murderous rage over everyday frustrations. These heightened feelings drive many ogres down selfish paths, and some take whatever they want from anyone too weak to protest. Other ogres can be manipulated into working for evil creatures who promise to meet their heart's desire, be it food, riches, or friendship.
Ogres who embrace good often dedicate themselves to inspiring causes, letting their emotions fuel their passion and dedication for protecting their chosen people or place.
SAVORY STORIES	
Some ogres speak of a time when they shared vast wealth and riches, great homes made of hewn stone, and sumptuous feasts. These stories end tragically, each with a different villain-from deceptive mages to talking cats- swindling the ogres of what is rightfully theirs. The truth of such legends remains unknown, but many cruel ogres use them as an excuse for their selfish indulgences.
ARISTOCRACY OF BULLIES
When wicked ogres gather more food than they can stomach or riches than they can spend, they use the excess to tempt their kin into working for them. These petty rulers make other ogres grovel at their feet for table scraps, then send them out into the world to steal more. Many ogre communities form around these arrogant aristocrats-but few such leaders die of old age, as the ambition and emotions of their subjects bring about violent ends.
CYCLOPS: OGRE PROGENITOR	
Ogres originally descended from the cyclops, an old-world giant with a single eye that still roams through canyons and valleys. These behemoths stand heads above the ogres and are twice as destructive once they've spotted their prey.
But while their binocular cousins have gone on to become successful hunters and live for themselves, the cyclops is a scavenger hindered by their poor eyesight. Most cyclopses are eager to work for and defend powerful warlords or wealthy ogres, so long as they have easy access to food and shelter.
Rumor has it that a cyclops can emit a mile long energy ray from their eye. However, focusing such power is nearly impossible when their vision is usually too irritated and clouded by dirt.
OGRE LANGUAGES
Most ogres speak Caelian and High Kuric.

	

OGRE BLUE BLOOD	LEVEL 7 MINION BRUTEGiant, Ogre	EV 18 for eight minionsStamina 13
Speed 5	Size 2 / Stability 4
With Captain Edge on strikes	Free Strike 4
Might +4	Agility +1	Reason -1	Intuition 0	Presence +2Crush Underfoot (Action) ? 2d10 + 4 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 2	Target One creature or object per minion
?	=11  4 damage
? 12-16  7 damage; M<3 prone
?	17  8 damage; prone
Effect An already prone target takes an additional 4 damage.In My Stead
Whenever the blue blood would make a free strike, an ally within 5 can make a free strike instead.Defiant Anger
The blue blood has damage immunity 2 while they are winded.
OGRE TANTRUM	LEVEL 7 MINION ARTILLERYGiant, Ogre	EV 18 for eight minionsStamina 10
Speed 5	Size 2 / Stability 2
With Captain Ranged distance +5	Free Strike 4
Might +4	Agility +2	Reason -1	Intuition 0	Presence -1Throw Fit (Action) ? 2d10 + 4 ? Signature
Keywords Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Ranged 8	Target One creature or object per minion
?	=11  4 damage
? 12-16  7 damage; push 2
?	17  8 damage; push 4
Effect The tantrum unearths a rock or a hunk of terrain and tosses it. The tantrum can A<3 grab an adjacent size-1 or smaller creature or object to use as the projectile for this ability.Excessive Anger
The tantrum has damage immunity 3 and a speed of 8 while they
are winded.


OLOTHEC
Protean in form, beings of nearly pure intellect, the Old Ones think in alien geometric logic. Their name for themselves is unrecorded, but sages believe they are the oldest beings in the timescape and simply call them "The Old Ones." Synlirii refer to them as olothec (OH-luh-thek)- "ancient enemies." But some humanoid scholars have noted this term bears an uncanny similarity to another archaic synlirii word meaning "ancient ancestor."
IMMORTAL EVIL

Across countless cultures and ancestries, olothec feature in nightmares and temple friezes alike. While their origins are obscure and may never be known, their hatred of the Mundane World and every living thing in it is well recorded. Olothec channel psionic energy beyond any mortal power, surpassing even the voiceless talkers. To them, a living creature who can't reshape their own flesh is repugnant, an unnatural abomination requiring eradication-or transformation.
AGENTS OF CHAOS

Olothec consider the primordial chaos that spawned them as the ideal state of existence. They have long warred against the voiceless talkers, loathing their constant manipulation and refinement of evolutionary forces. Where olothec lair in forgotten sea tunnels and beneath ancient ruins, they surround themselves with slime servants- humanoids, beasts, aberrations, and others, all devolved to a perfect physical and mental state.
PRIMORDIAL FORM

At first sight, an olothec seems like little more than a rippling mass of tentacles, twisting around each other like a shifting shroud. Creatures who get too close discover each of those tentacles ends in a ravenous mouth set with razor- sharp teeth. Each mouth is tipped by a cluster of three eyes that focus the olothec's relentless attacks. In water or on land, fetid slime coats the aberration, protecting them against attackers and acting as a conduit for their fearsome psionic power.
MUTATIONS OF THE FLESH	
Millennia of practice allow olothec to perfect their psionic abilities that devolve and transform their victims into primordial life forms. Exposure to the psionic slime of an olothec's tentacles can change a creature into a mindless, oozeing thrall. The most powerful olothec have unique powers that further warp flesh.

OLOTHEC LANGUAGES	
Most olothec speak Urollialic and use Mindspeech exclusively. Only when necessary do olothec converse in Old Variac and Caelian.


OLOTHEC MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of an olothec's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Psychic Shock ? 3 Malice
The olothec reaches into the minds of anyone falling under their in?uence to deliver a debilitating mental attack. Each slimed, transformed, or devolved creature makes a Reason test.
?	=11  16 psychic damage; frightened (save ends)
? 12-16  13 psychic damage; frightened (EoT)
?	17+  7 psychic damageWrithing Envelopment (Maneuver) ? 2d10 + 4 ? 5 Malice
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 3 Target One slimed, transformed, or devolved creature
?	=11  11 psychic damage; A<2 grabbed
? 12-16  17 psychic damage; A<3 grabbed
?	17  20 psychic damage; A<4 grabbed
E?ect The olothec pulls a target grabbed as part of this ability adjacent to them. The olothec has a double edge on strikes against a creature grabbed this way, and a grabbed target can't save against any other e?ects until they are no longer grabbed.Memory of Chaos ? 7 Malice
The olothec broadcasts their memory of the universe in its primordial state, a sweeping cacophony of transcendental irrationality and unceasing change utterly anathema to the ordered mind. Until the end of the encounter, any creature that starts their turn within 3 of the olothec is R<3 slowed and dazed
(EoT).

	

ORCS
In a long-lost language, the word oruk-"blood fire"- described the glowing appearance of the orc people when they push themselves to their limits. While orcs know one another as kanin in their own tongue, they also use "orc" with great pride, especially when dealing with other folk.
Orc history spans the world and all its ages. They've settled into villages and cities, hot and cold climates, high in the mountains and deep underground. Most orcs live in diverse humanoid societies, though a few live secluded in the tropics.
Though orcs are no more likely to stand in the adventurers' way than any other folk, those who do fill the same roles as other humanoids: mercenaries, bounty hunters, garroters, guards, cultists, and corrupt kings.
RELENTLESSLY TOUGH	
Orcs grow to impressive heights. The veins that commonly stripe their tough-skinned faces can appear more vibrant when they're excited or driven. Their hair, which can range from coarse to fine, extends from their heads and drapes across their shoulders like royal mantles. Strong tusks extend past their lips and guard the rest of their teeth.
Few other humanoids can match the endurance of an orc, and orcs who train for hunting and combat can rally themselves to move faster and prevail longer. Should an orc find themself on the brink of death, their veins instinctively surge with "blood fire," glowing brightly and invigorating them to perform one last attack. Blood fire often appears red, though orcs from the mountains and underground glow blue and white respectively.
INNATE POWER

The intense power of an orc's spirit occasionally manifests as raw magic. Orc dynamos hone their magic into singular affinities that are easy to manipulate. Orc terranovas move their magic through their feet, surging into the earth. Orc godcallers use song to spark the magic inherent in every creature's spirit.
MOHLERS

Mohlers are spined, pig-like beasts that corkscrew through the ground faster than they can run. Originating from deserts and forests, these burrowing creatures produce shallow networks of tunnels just below the surface. Where orcs go, mohlers are sure to follow. In times of peace, orcs domesticate them to plow the earth and eat pests-and in times of war, mohlers reshape the battlefield and knock the orcs' enemies off their feet.
When an orc community has exceptional gratitude for the deeds of one of their own or an outsider, they bestow the companionship of a mohler upon the individual. Treated kindly, mohlers make steadfast companions, protecting their caregivers with their lives. If mistreated, a mohler returns to their original den, and the orcs hunt the responsible party.

SCYZA	
Orcs rely on giant bipedal lizards called scyzas to carry them over great distances. Orcs adorn these mounts, which originated in the tropics, with great harnesses that allow dozens of orcs to ride the scyza at the same time. The lizards are fearless in the face of danger, making them perfect battle mounts.
The scyza's trunk-like legs and claws cleave through the ground and kick up terrible dust storms. Worse still are their battering head crests, which emit a terrible, bone- shaking ringing sound.
ORC LANGUAGES	
Most orcs speak Caelian and Kalliak.


ORC MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any orc's turn, you can spend malice to activate one of
the following features.Overwhelming March ? 3 Malice
Each orc shifts up to their speed, moving through enemy squares if they can. Each enemy that was passed through during this movement makes a Might test.
?	=11  6 damage; prone
? 12-16  4 damage; prone
?	17+  Push 2Mohler Trench ? 5 Malice
An orc acting this turn summons 2 mohlers out of the ground to dig a 1  10 line trench within 10 and join the encounter. The trench is 2 squares deep and is considered di?cult terrain. The trench cannot be created directly underneath creatures.Mohler Cavity ? 7 Malice
The ground shakes as a group of mohlers dig a 5 cube pit beneath an area where at least one character is standing. The mohlers leave, and the area is considered di?cult terrain. Each orc in the area can shift into the nearest unoccupied square outside of the pit before it is completed. Each non-orc in the area makes an Agility test.
?	=11  9 damage; target falls; prone can't stand (EoT)
? 12-16  6 damage; target falls
?	17 Target can shift into the nearest unoccupied square outside of the pit




	


	

RETAINER	

ORC CHARGERLEVEL 1 HARRIER RETAINERHumanoid, OrcEV 13Stamina 30Speed 8Size 1M/Stability 0Free Strike 3Might +2	Agility +2Reason 0Intuition 0	Presence 0Notched Axe (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Charge, Melee, Range, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1 or Ranged 5	Target One creature or object
?	=11  3 damage
? 12-16  5 damage
?	17  7 damageRelentless
If the charger's Stamina drops to 0, they can make a free strike before dying. If the target is reduced to 0 Stamina or killed by the
attack, the charger lives and their Stamina is reduced to 1 instead.



RADENWIGHTS
Small, agile, and hardy, radenwights have the appearance of humanoid rodents. They're often referred to as "ratfolk," a name they don't particularly mind but also don't embrace. Should anyone ask, many radenwights speak of being a ratfolk when they're alone, but always a radenwight when part of a group. Radenwight groups proudly call themselves a "meddle," and have a knack for appearing where others hoped they wouldn't or whenever they are least expected. Radenwight meddles can be found in the wilderness as easily as in any city, so long as there's suitable work and excitement to keep the members of the meddle occupied.
If radenwights' enemies expect them to scurry away like rats, they will be painfully surprised to see the combined arrows, bodies, and blades of a meddle thrown against them all at once. Whatever radenwights do, they do it fearlessly, with deeply cherished values of bravery and fair play shining through even the most rakish and roguish of them. Radenwights aren't above banditry if it would support the meddle, but they greatly prefer to overwhelm, knock down, and knock out their targets rather than engage in deadly violence. They prefer weapons of precision and look for opportunities to strike as they and their comrades create openings for one another.
BONDS AND BRAVADO

It's a big world out there for a bunch of small ratfolk, and radenwights learned long ago that trying to survive by running away or climbing to safety only gets you so far. Radenwights learn boldness from birth and are taught to hurl themselves fearlessly against any challenge that stands in their way. The key to this bravery is the intense bond of trust that exists between every radenwight, their comrades, and their community, and the knowledge that every other radenwight will act just as decisively as they do. In a scrap, it's not one radenwight's blade or arrow that brings down the foe, but the instant and instinctual follow-up from their fellows.
THE MAGIC OF MUSIC	
The pursuit of arcane studies is unusual among radenwights, though the community throws their support behind any child who happens to show that talent.
Somewhat more common is the spontaneous discovery of magical aptitude through music, as the culture of radenwight meddles strongly emphasizes both music and dance. Radenwights are particularly drawn to flutes and panpipes, inspired by the legend of a flutist who enraptured an evil dragon while her meddle lined up a suitably sized boulder to be dropped from the cliff above.
THE GREAT MACLETTE

The name Maclette is never uttered without The Great before it. The radenwight maestro leads his band in complex city-wide robberies that always seem to be one step ahead of any would-be ratcatchers. Some say Maclette leads his life of crime to provide for his meddle, while others claim he strives to be king of the criminal world.
In truth, The Great Maclette finds beauty in the thrill of the heist. Robbery is as euphonious as music to his ears, and

the maestro treats every operation like a new composition. As long as his band remains at large, he'll always be looking to outdo himself with his next great masterpiece.
RADENWIGHT LANGUAGES	
Most radenwights speak Caelian and Szetch.


RADENWIGHT MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any radenwight's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Trouser Cut (Action) (Non-minion) ? 2d10 +2 ? 3 Malice
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target One creature
?	=11  7 damage; push 3
? 12-16  10 damage; push 3; taunted (EoT)
?	17+  13 damage; push 5; taunted (EoT)
Effect If a target is wearing clothing covering the lower half of their body, they must use a maneuver to pull that clothing up before they can move.Rat Race ? 5 Malice
Each radenwight shifts up to their speed. Wherever a radenwight ends this movement adjacent to at least one other radenwight, they can make a melee free strike against each adjacent enemy.Rally the Rodents ? 7 Malice
A radenwight uses music to coordinate rats to form a 10 wall of living rats scurrying atop one another into unoccupied spaces anywhere on the encounter map. The wall doesn't block line of e?ect for radenwights and their allies, but it does for other creatures, as the rats coordinate their movements with the radenwights. Each square of the wall has 10 Stamina. If the last radenwight in the encounter dies and the wall is still standing, the rats let out a hideous screech as they disperse. Each enemy on the encounter map makes an Intuition test.
?	=11 7 sonic damage; target can't take a respite activity during their next respite
? 12-16  5 sonic damage
?	17+  No effect
	



RETAINER	

RADENWIGHT SIDEKICKLEVEL 1 SUPPORT RETAINERHumanoid, RadenwightEV 13Stamina 30Speed 5 (climb)Size 1S/Stability 0Free Strike 2Might 0	Agility +2Reason 0Intuition +1	Presence 0Dagger's Bite (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - SignatureKeywords Melee, Ranged, Strike, WeaponDistance Melee 1, Ranged 5	Target One creature or object?	=11  3 damage? 12-16  5 damage?	17+  7 damageReady Rodent (Triggered Action)
Keywords Melee, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target 1 creature
Trigger An ally deals damage to the target.
Effect The sidekick makes a free strike against the target.



RIVALS
They take the jobs you were eyeing on the local town's job board. They sit at your favorite table in the tavern with the best drinks, food, and entertainment. You know their name, and they know yours. They're rivals-heroes just like you, and maybe better.
Rivals are streamlined and modular, meant to be easy to adjust on the fly with ancestral traits or signature abilities. They're presented at every tier, capturing their foray into renown as it inevitably crosses, clashes with, and impedes the heroes' journey.
USING RIVALS IN A CAMPAIGN	
The next time the heroes suddenly visit a local temple in


PolderSize 1M / Stability 1
Ancestral Trait - Nimblestep
The rival ignores the effects of difficult terrain and
moves at full speed while they're sneaking.RevenantSize 1M / Stability 2
Ancestral Trait - Vengeance Mark
The rival places a magic sigil on an enemy within
10. The rival always knows the direction to that enemy while the sigil is active on them. The rival can detonate the sigil as an action, dealing damage equal to their free strike and sliding the target 2
squares.Time RaiderSize 1M / Stability 0
Ancestral Trait - Forearms
The rival can grab or knockback two creatures at
the same time using the same power roll.RIVAL ABILITIES

search of capable clergy to help with a horde of undead, you		

won't be fumbling for a stat block-that's what rivals are for. These grab-and-go adaptations of classes are meant to capture enough of the class fantasy without making Directors run a full hero character sheet.
They also seamlessly work together, allowing Directors to build a party of NPC heroes or villains who can be allies, enemies, or (quite literally) rivals. They can foil the heroes, showing other ways to use their strength and power.
RIVAL ANCESTRIES	
You can adjust the rival stat blocks to more closely model the rival's ancestry. Select one of the following ancestries, adjust the size and stability, and add the new keyword and ancestral trait.

Each of the rivals can replace their signature action with one the heroes have access to. The censor, tactician, shadow, and fury can select a signature action from any kit, while the other rivals can select a signature action from their respective class. The new ability deals extra damage equal to the rival's level.
RIVAL LANGUAGES	
Most rivals speak Caelian and two other languages.


KeywordAdjustmentsDevilSize 1M / Stability 0
Ancestral Trait - Prehensile Tail
The rival can't be flanked.Dragon KnightSize 1M / Stability 1
Ancestral Trait - Wings
The rival has the Fly keyword added to their
movement. While flying, their stability is 0.DwarfSize 1M / Stability 2
Ancestral Trait - Great Fortitude
The rival can't be weakened.High Elf / Wode ElfSize 1M / Stability 0
Ancestral Trait - Otherworldly Grace
At the start of their turn, the rival can turn the duration of one save ends effect they suffer from
into EoT.HakkanSize 1L / Stability 2
Ancestral Trait - Forceful
When the rival force moves a creature or object,
they can increase the distance by 2.HumanSize 1M / Stability 1
Ancestral Trait - Determination
If the rival is frightened, slowed, or weakened,
they can use a maneuver to end the condition.MemonekSize 1M / Stability 0
Ancestral Trait - Nonstop
The rival can't be slowed.OrcSize 1M / Stability 2
Ancestral Trait - Glowing Recovery
The rival can use their maneuver to regain Stamina
equal to 5 times their level once per round.








SHAMBLING MOUND
The lush ground squelches under every footstep. Curtains of menacing vines block the way, and muffled groans echo distantly under the darkening canopy. By the time you realize the ground is moving, it's too late- the shambling mound has devoured you.
Found in overgrown swamps, stinking marshes, dense wodes, and dark, damp rainforests, the shambling mound is a wandering mass of vegetation that feeds on everything in their path.
NOXIOUS ORIGINS

A shambling mound is most often a byproduct of nearby hags or mages, especially evil ones or those utilizing green magic. Latent magic seeps into the surrounding land, coalescing into a nocuous creature consumed by hunger. The shambling mound knows only that they must grow, and to grow they must feed-and thus they drag themself in search of a hunting ground.
It is believed these magical origins are what give shambling mounds their ability to produce poisons. These poisons range from region to region-for example, the toxins from a shambling mound along coastal beaches or swamps might appear milky white and smell sweet like manchineel trees, while shambling mounds found in rainforests might give off a heady, intoxicating sweet scent at night, luring victims in with beautiful pale blooms like angel's trumpets and producing intense hallucinations for those unfortunate enough to become poisoned.
While more specific effects may vary, each shambling mound's toxins typically have the same aim: enervate their foes, so that they might magically absorb that strength and vitality.

HEARTY EATERS

As a shambling mound drags their massive form through the undergrowth, they consume any organic matter they pass. When they find a good place to lurk until a meal comes to them, the result is far more satisfying. After a mound engulfs their prey-be they animal or adventurer- the meal-to-be is sealed in a sack of interwoven vines and leaves. This vegetative hunter can then sap the strength of those within to feast or empower itself.

VERDANT CORE AND EXPANSIVE SPRAWL 
When fighting a shambling mound, most attention is drawn to the cavernous chamber that holds their consumed victims. However, the shambling mound protects a smaller magical core with a knot of vines, leaves, and other natural defenses. The mound can expose this core to free up their form and become deadlier, thus opening themselves up, in turn, for more harm.
One must also be wary of the area around a shambling mound-their vines reach out far, the full extent of their form hidden amongst other flora until they strike enemies from afar.


SHAMBLING MOUND MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of a shambling mound's turn, you can spend malice to
activate one of the following features.Poisoned Vines ? 3 Malice
The shambling mound seeps noxious residue from its vines and deals 12 poison damage against both targets the next time they use their Vine Lash action before the end of their next turn.Grasp and Squeeze ? 5 Malice
The shambling mound writhes, lashing out at each enemy within 10 to snatch them into the air, crush them, and drop them. Each target makes an Agility test.
?	=11 7 damage; A<3 vertical or horizontal push 5; restrained
? 12-16  6 damage; M<2 vertical or horizontal push 3
?	17  3 damageLeeching Wilds ? 7 Malice
Until the end of the shambling mound's next turn, the area within 10 squares of them is considered di?cult terrain for enemies. An enemy who starts their turn in an a?ected square takes 4 acid damage, and the shambling mound regains an equal amount of Stamina. An enemy has a bane on power rolls while occupying an
a?ected square.
	

TIME RAIDERS
The kuran'zoi (coor-AN-zoy), also called time raiders, are humanoids who make the Sea of Stars their home. Many kuran'zoi make their living as guides for travelers from other planes, while others survive on the Sea of Stars through piracy against interplanar vessels.
VETERANS OF THE PSYCHIC WARS	
Thousands of years ago, the synlirii-a powerful species of evil psionic aberrations-created the kuran'zoi as soldiers. But as the synlirii experimented with and enhanced these warriors' psionic potential, the kuran'zoi came to understand the true nature of their progenitors. They rebelled against the synlirii and fled to the Sea of Stars, becoming nomads of the timescape.
HARDENED-VISION HEXAPODS

Kuran'zoi possess resilient ocular sensors that allow them to see in the dark. Knowing these sensors would also defend them against the hardlight storms of the astral realm, the escaping kuran'zoi chose the Sea of Stars as their home. They thrive where the winds of limbo roar.
Time raiders also have two sets of arms, allowing them to wield melee weapons at the same time as ranged weapons. A single well-trained kuran'zoi is like a squad unto themself.
PSI-TECH	
Like their synlirii foes, time raiders travel on mindships and wield psionic weapons and tools that only their people can activate. Many kuran'zoi specialize in melee weapons that psionically devastate enemies, but time raider vertexes also learn to pilot enormous suits of psionic armor that empower their allies.
GENRE RAIDERS

The moniker "time raider" is imprecise. Rather, when kuran'zoi raid a world of the timescape that relies on sorcery instead of kuran'zoi technology-including Orden-it seems to those worlds' people as though the time raiders have come from the future, wielding marvelous weapons of light that hit as hard as steel.
LEAVE A FEW ALIVE

Time raider pirates plunder the vessels they target, but allow just enough of the crew to survive so the ship can make it back home. Kuran'zoi pirate captains often remind their crews: "Leave the sheep alive. Next year, they'll return with a new coat of wool for us to shear."
CREATURES OUTSIDE TIME	
While in the Sea of Stars, time raiders and other creatures don't age. As a result, many living kuran'zoi recall the Psychic Wars. They carry the lessons learned from millennia of conflict with the synlirii into new battles with devastating effect, using mindships to launch attacks on other planes and appearing exactly where they want to. However, this knowledge serves them far beyond war.

Time raiders raise their young in ruined citadels and similar strongholds on obscure worlds, keeping their creches secret and protected.
TIME RAIDER LANGUAGES	
Most time raiders speak Caelian and Voll.


TIME RAIDER MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any time raider's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Gravity Well (Maneuver) ? 3 Malice
Keywords Area, Psionic, Weapon
Distance 5 cube within 3	Target Special
Effect A time raider acting this turn activates a gravity well in the affected area. The gravity well sits in the center of the cube and lasts until the end of the encounter or until a creature who can reach the well uses a maneuver to disable it. The affected area is considered difficult terrain for enemies. Whenever an enemy ends their turn in an affected square, they are pulled 4 towards the well.Recall Module ? 5 Malice
Until the end of the round, each time raider has the teleport
keyword added to their movement and their speed increases by 3.Psi-Cage ? 10 Malice
All time raiders in the encounter create a psionic ?eld over the encounter map, which lasts until the time raider with the highest Stamina maximum drops to Stamina 0 or chooses to end the ?eld. While the ?eld is up, each non-time raider on the map must make a Reason test against this psionic e?ect at the start of each round.
?	=11  10 psychic damage; slowed (EoT)
? 12-16  7 psychic damage; slowed (EoT)
?	17+  No effect


	


	

RETAINER	

TIME RAIDER MIND HEALERLEVEL 3 SUPPORT RETAINERHumanoid, Psionic, Time RaiderEV 19Stamina 50Immunity Psychic 5Speed 5Size 1M/Stability 0Free Strike 4Might 0	Agility +2	Reason +2Intuition +2	Presence 0Laser Lancet (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Ranged 3	Target One creature or object
? =11  5 fire damage
? 12-16  8 fire damage
? 17+  11 fire damage
Effect The healer can end one EoT or Save Ends effect on the target.Foresight
The healer doesn't have a bane on attacks against concealed
creatures.



TROLLS
The embodiment of carnivorous hunger, trolls rampage through the wild, leaving destruction in their wake. Tall and gangly, their mottled green skin is covered by a mane of matted hair that runs around their neck and down their back. In many ways, they resemble massive humanoids, but their exaggerated features belie this comparison; their lower jaw hangs unhinged and distended, and their long arms end in claws which drag along the ground as they walk.
HYPERMETABOLISM
A troll's constant hunger and aggression begets a life of violence. Like a grotesque miracle, they quickly assimilate consumed flesh into themselves to regenerate their body. Some scholars think this extreme metabolic process is the source of their hunger, but none know for certain which came first.
PHASES OF DESTRUCTION
Fortunately for the ecosystems they inhabit, trolls can't be active all the time. Their natural behavior is to hunt relentlessly for a few days, then return to their dens to rest for as much as a week. Patient troll hunters can wait for this hibernation and catch the trolls by surprise-though the cost of waiting can be high, thanks to the damage the trolls might do in the meantime
STRANGE MUTATIONS
Trolls prefer to prey upon humanoids and animals, but stories have circulated of them feeding on fetid demons and undead, assimilating their flesh to magnificent and horrifying effect. A troll with loose hanging skin, curling nails, or exposed bone might be in better health than their appearance would suggest.
LIMBJUMBLES
When a suitably large piece of mutated troll is torn off in battle, it does its very best to keep on living. Mutation and deep-seated survival instinct go into overdrive, sprouting unthinkable assortments of malformed arms and legs.
Though these limbjumbles are ultimately short-lived, they can often be found tumbling awkwardly behind living trolls.
TROLL LANGUAGES
Most trolls speak Variac or High Kuric, while a few also know Caelian. Trolls are difficult to negotiate with unless a hero can provide more appetizing food than themselves.



TROLL GLUTTON	LEVEL 5 TROOP BRUTEGiant, Troll	EV 28Stamina 160	Weakness Acid 5, Fire 5
Speed 6	Size 2 / Stability 4
Free Strike 7
Might +3	Agility +1	Reason -1	Intuition +0  Presence +1Voracious Mastication (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target 2 creatures or objects
?	=11  10 damage
? 12-16  15 damage; M<2 slowed (save ends)
?	17  18 damage; M<3 slowed (save ends)
1 Malice The glutton regains Stamina equal to the damage dealt.Crash Through (Action) ? 3 Malice
Keywords -
Distance Self	Target Self
Effect The glutton shifts up to their speed in a straight line, ignoring difficult terrain. A creature can choose to fall prone or take 10 damage the first time the glutton passes through their space during the movement. If the glutton moves into a creature or object larger than them and the glutton doesn't knock the creature prone or destroy the object, the glutton's movement stops early and they become dazed until the end of their next turn.Food Frenzy (Maneuver)
Keywords -
Distance Self	Target Self
Effect The glutton has a double edge on strikes and strikes have an edge against them, until the start of their next turn.Spiteful Retort (Free Triggered Action) ? 1 Malice
Keywords -
Distance Melee 1	Target Self
Trigger The glutton is reduced to 0 Stamina but doesn't die.
Effect The glutton uses their Voracious Mastication ability against an adjacent creature.Insatiable Appetite
Once per turn, the glutton can take the Charge action as a free
maneuver if they target a winded creature.Relentless Hunger
The glutton only dies when they are reduced to 0 Stamina by acid or fire damage, end their turn with 0 Stamina, or take acid or fire
damage while at 0 Stamina.
RETAINER	

TROLL MERCENARY	LEVEL 5 BRUTE RETAINERGiant, Troll	EV 28Stamina 80	Weakness Acid 5, Fire 5
Speed 6	Size 2/Stability 4
Free Strike 6
Might +3	Agility +1	Reason -1	Intuition 0	Presence +1Big Bite (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Charge, Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target One creature or object
? =11  6 damage
? 12-16  11 damage
? 17+  14 damage
Effect The mercenary regains Stamina equal to half the damage dealt.Troll Roar (Maneuver, Encounter)
Keywords Area, Resistance
Distance 3 burst	Target All enemies
? =11  P (weak) frightened (save ends)
? 12-16  P (average) frightened (save ends)
? 17+  P (strong) frightened (save ends), push 3, proneRelentless Hunger
The mercenary only dies when they are reduced to 0 Stamina by
acid or ?re damage, end their turn with 0 Stamina, or take acid or ?re damage while at 0 Stamina.




UNDEAD
Some serve as mindless soldiers and workers under the control of a necromancer. Others rise when they die a bitter death in a place infused with cursed magic. For a few, it was a choice to become something other than a mortal. No matter the reason for their creation, all undead were once living creatures who walk the land after death in defiance of the natural order.
Rotting zombies, seductive vampires, wailing wraiths, and more undead stalk the widespread horror stories nobles and commoners alike tell each another around low-burning hearths. Even the most isolated hermits know that the dead can rise, eager to kill. These popular tales fuel many people's fears of the undead. Mere rumors of a nearby ghoul pack can send an entire community into a panic.
When open graves appear in the churchyard or a translucent spirit is spotted on the street, local leaders are quick to hire adventurers to deal with the threat.
DARK PLACES	
For many undead, sunlight is a nuisance that they naturally avoid. While it is rarely harmful to them, the sun's golden rays make them uncomfortable and seems to shine far too bright to their dead eyes. Walking in the light of day also makes it easier for fearful mortals to spot an undead. Many undead avoid the sun entirely, hiding in tombs or ruins until nightfall when they can freely stalk their victims.
ENCOUNTERED TOGETHER	
Undead creatures are often encountered in groups that include more than just a single kind of creature. A necromancer might raise zombies, skeletons, and ghouls to protect their mansion, as each serves a different function as a guardian. A lich could have wraiths as messengers and wights as laboratory assistants. An ancient tomb might have mummies and vampires within. The undead don't need to drink, eat, sleep, or breathe, and many share an affinity for lightless places, leading to these congregations.
CORPOREAL UNDEAD	
At their most innocuous, corporeal undead are a mockery of life, a body dragged along by unnatural strings. At their worst, they are a violent scourge hungry for slaughter, a perverse reflection of the mortal desire to exist for eternity. Ghouls, skeletons, wights, and zombies number among the lesser corporeal undead. Most lack a soul, and many can't think beyond the orders of their creators (unlike more powerful corporeal undead, such as liches and vampires). Those who aren't controlled by others typically have a singular focus: the destruction of all living things.
The magic that animates a corpse removes the need for air, sleep, and sustenance. These spells also halt decay, preserving the undead at the stage of deterioration when magic touched them. While most corporeal undead are brought to unlife by a creator, there are tales of zombies suddenly rising from graveyards during rare astrological

occurrences, skeletal soldiers emerging from mass graves on the anniversary of their death, and other seemingly spontaneous acts of necromancy.
INCORPOREAL UNDEAD	
Umbral stalkers. Specters. Wraiths. Spectral undead come in many forms. One might be formed by a person's vile actions in life, while another could be a soul lost to a necromancer's dark art. Powerful undead can even manifest these shadowy beings into existence through sheer will. Regardless of how they come to be, spectral undead are malice incarnate.
Spectral undead who naturally formed from the souls of malicious, hate-filled humanoids usually haunt the places where they died, while those manifested by another being serve their creator. Left to their own devices, spectral undead stop at nothing to kill the living they encounter, with some stalking their quarry over miles of wilderness.
UNDEAD LANGUAGES	
Most undead speak the languages they knew in life.


UNDEAD MALICE	LEVEL 1+ MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any undead's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Paranormal Fling ? 3 Malice
Up to three objects on the encounter map that aren't held or tethered to the ground ?oat 1 square o? the ground. Each object is then pulled 5 squares toward the nearest enemy within 3 squares of the object.Abyssal Rift ? 5 Malice
Ravenous and rotting undead arms burst forth from 9 connected squares of a vertical or horizontal surface. A creature who ends their turn adjacent to an a?ected square makes an Agility test.
?	=11  5 damage; restrained (save ends)
? 12-16  5 damage; restrained (EoT)
?	17+  5 damage
A creature who starts their turn restrained by the arms takes 1d6 damage.Dread March ? 7 Malice
Each undead creature in the encounter moves up to their speed and makes a free strike. If an undead creature is reduced to Stamina 0 during this dread march, they don't die until their movement and attacks are resolved.Intensity Tally
At the end of each round, keep an intensity tally of the number of living heroes not adjacent to one or more undead creatures.
When the tally reaches the number of heroes in the encounter,
you can spend malice to activate the following feature.
Ravenous Horde (3 Malice) Each living hero in the encounter is beset by two winded rotting zombies who burst out of unoccupied spaces 4 squares away. The number of rotting zombies increases to three per hero when three or fewer heroes remain
alive in the encounter. The intensity tally resets to 0.







































ROTTING ZOMBIE	LEVEL 1 MINION BRUTEUndead	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 5	Immunity corruption 1, poison 1
Speed 4	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Strike damage +1	Free Strike 2
Might +2	Agility -2	Reason -5	Intuition -2  Presence -3Rotting Fist (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1	Target One creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage
?	17+ 5 damage; M<2 prone if size 1, slowed (save ends) otherwiseDeath Grasp
When the rotting zombie is reduced to Stamina 0, their square becomes di?cult terrain. The ?rst time any enemy enters this
space, they are M<2 slowed (save ends).
	




UNDEAD - 2ND ECHELON
When the dead rise, all of hell rises with them.
LADY DEMELZA, COURSER
MUMMIES
Mummies are humanoids raised from the dead via a complex series of magical rituals. The process tethers a creature's soul to their earthly body, preventing them from crossing into true death. As part of the mummification process, a corpse is embalmed and wrapped in cloth imbued with necromantic power. Mummification is reserved for situations of grave import. A great hero may voluntarily be mummified upon death to eternally guard future generations or a holy relic. On the other hand, a great villain may be mummified to prevent them from escaping their crimes through death.
VAMPIRE SPAWN	
Vampirism is a curse of blood. A curse that harrows its victims, turning them into mirror-mockeries of life that nonetheless hunger for life's essence: blood. With that hunger comes power everlasting over life and death. By feeding, a vampire passes this curse onto their victims.
Though vampires are fundamentally changed from their mortal forms, they retain the intellect and memories of their mortal selves. A vampire's power grows as they spend time in undeath. Vampire spawn, the youngest of their ilk, are barely separated from their mortal selves. They are driven by their thirst for blood and their master's orders. Few spawn survive long enough to become true vampires.
MOURNLINGS
Powered by sorrow and rage, these hulking amalgamations of dirt or flesh defend the homes of their creators, brutally attacking intruders while sobbing uncontrollably.
Mournlings express far more emotion than many other undead guardians, for their makers imbued them with sadness and loss. Though their druidic creators are long- dead, some original mournlings still defend forests, mead- ows, and other natural places they were built to protect.
Outside of battle, mournlings patrol for interlopers in a trance-like state. When an unknown creature creates a disturbance or approaches them, the mournling unleashes a primal cry that conveys the very essence of suffering, then they burst into violence. They continue to sob and moan even as they viciously beat their enemies to a pulp.


UNDEAD MALICE	LEVEL 4+ MALICE FEATURESAt the start of a level 4+ undead's turn, you can spend malice to
activate one of the following features.Prior Malice Features ? X Malice
The undead activates a malice feature available to undead level 3
or lower.Blood Hunger ? 5 Malice
As a part of the next signature action used on a bleeding creature,
all undead creatures within 5 can move up to their speed and make a free strike on the same target.
	

	

VOICELESS TALKERS
Among the most powerful psions in the timescape, synlirii (singular: synliroi) are known as the "voiceless talkers" to the denizens of the World Below-and to surface dwellers unfortunate enough to encounter them. Descended from boneless aquatic cephalopods, they are alien in thought and motivation to the humanoid species they loathe. Synlirii consider the "barking ones" (their label for creatures who squeeze air through meat flaps to communicate) to be an abomination that must be corrected.
UNEASY ALLIANCES	
Though synlirii and overminds are hereditary enemies, their mutual obsession with the barking ones often leads to uneasy alliances. Both synlirii and overminds employ humanoids from the World Below as agents, trading lore and technology for information on their surface foes.
OLOTHEC HATRED

The synlirii's visceral antipathy toward the barking ones is surpassed only by their deep enmity toward (and fear of) olothec. Ancient myths say this is a harmless fable. But synlirii, who style themselves as the future masters of the timescape, rage against implications that their powers come from any source other than their own superior development.
PSIONIC SPIES

Despite their mental powers, voiceless talkers consider information their greatest weapon. They use their psionic talents to manipulate memory and perception, obscure their forms, and pass undetected among other cultures.
PSI-TECH

Synlirii breed mollusks that secrete plastic-like substances, using them to fashion weapons and similar technology powered by psionic crystals. The voiceless talkers' handheld psi-pistols and portable psi-rifles can be used only by their alien minds.
CREATURE ENGINEERS	
Synlirii are obsessed with manipulating the natural development of other organisms. They create hulking brains, mindkillers, and other servants using a psionic technique they call the Interlace. Many synlirii experiments don't live long and aren't intended to. But the World Below is littered with unnatural creatures who escaped the voiceless talkers' body banks-most of them singular life forms that can't reproduce and may never die.
GRAYWARPERS	
Graywarpers are voiceless talkers who were drained of most of their psionic abilities-and free will-as punishment for insolence or incompetence. They are viewed solely as expendable tools who enhance the power of other voiceless talkers.

HULKING BRAIN	
The voiceless talkers have engineered pearlescent-skinned, humanoid-shaped aberrations with four massive arms and-in place of a head-a large pulsing brain. Called thylina by voiceless talkers and hulking brains by everyone else, these creatures serve as bodyguards and psionic batteries for their synlirii creators.
MINDKILLER	
Floating clawed brains with a trailing spinal column and nerves, mindkillers serve as the voiceless talkers' pets and lackeys. These amorphous parasites can force themselves into a humanoid's body through the ear, eye, or nose, then devour the victim's central nervous system while replacing it with their own tissue. When the process is complete, the mindkiller gains all the victim's knowledge and memories and can puppet the body, becoming the perfect spy for the mindkiller's synlirii overlords.
Mindkiller whelps are a lesser form of mindkiller that can be created in a fraction of the time. While they can't inhabit bodies, their mere presence weakens their foes' mental defenses against psionics
VOICELESS TALKER LANGUAGES	
Most voiceless talkers communicate telepathically using Mindspeech and Variac.


VOICELESS TALKER MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any voiceless talker's turn, you can spend malice to
activate one of the following features.Guise ? 3 Malice
A non-minion voiceless talker projects a psionic image over their body, making them unable to be identi?ed as an enemy until the end of their next turn.Memory Thief (Maneuver) (Non-minion) ? 2d10 + 3 ? 5 Malice
Keywords Psionic, Ranged
Distance Ranged 5	Target 1 creature
?	=11 6 psychic damage; R<1 target cannot identify allies as allies (save ends)
? 12-16 10 psychic damage; R<2 target identifies allies as enemies (save ends)
?	17 13 psychic damage; R<3 target identifies allies as enemies (save ends)Evolutionary Circuit ? 10 Malice
The voiceless talkers link their minds, creating a circuit that empowers them while at least two voiceless talkers remain. While this circuit is active, all psionic strikes deal an additional 5 damage. Additionally, when a voiceless talker takes damage, they may use a free triggered action to swap places with any minion on the map.
The minion takes the damage instead.


	

	

LORD SYUUL
Chief Design Architect of his nation's body banks, the synliroi Lord Syuul (see-YOU-ull) seeks more material for his experiments. His spies, informants, and allies are always on the lookout for subjects with unique hereditary traits the Interlace might extract.
A LORD ABOVE
Lord Syuul, who belongs to an ancient and respected noble house, often leaves his estate without his typical retinue to slow him down. His house would prefer he not do this, so they always send a covert squad of bodyguards to track his movements. Confronting Lord Syuul guarantees incurring the ire of the rest of his house.
Syuul's recent experiments have focused on isolating the trait that expresses sorcerous ability in humanoids. Thus far, these attempts have been unsuccessful. Not to be deterred, Lord Syuul has placed his assistant in charge of the day-to-day operations of the body banks, while Syuul himself ventures forth to observe the surface world and plunder its diversity.
LORD SYUUL'S LANGUAGES	
Lord Syuul uses Mindspeech and Variac.


LORD SYUUL'S MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of Lord Syuul's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Guise ? 3 Malice
Lord Syuul projects a psionic image over their body, making him
unable to be identi?ed as an enemy until the end of his next turn.Do It For Me ? 5 Malice
Lord Syuul psionically plunders the mind of all creatures within 2 of him. Each creature makes a Reason test.
?	=11 13 psychic damage; makes a signature attack against a creature Lord Syuul chooses.
? 12-16 10 psychic damage; makes a free strike against a creature Lord Syuul chooses.
?	17  No Effect.Overpower ? 7 Malice
Lord Syuul sends out a psionic burst to completely overpower his greatest threats. He makes a Reason Test (2d10 + 4).
?	=11  Lord Syuul gains damage weakness 5.
? 12-16  Lord Syuul gains damage immunity 2.
?	17  Lord Syuul gains damage immunity 5.
He can repeat this reason test once per round as a maneuver,
replacing the previous Overpower e?ect.
However, any hero who has at least one psionic ability can use their maneuver to push back on this e?ect with a Reason Test of their own, replacing the previous Overpower e?ect.
?	=11  Lord Syuul gains damage immunity 5.
? 12-16  Lord Syuul gains damage immunity 2.
?	17  Lord Syuul gains damage weakness 5.
The Overpower e?ect lasts until the end of the encounter.
	

RETAINER	

VOICELESS TALKER EXILE	LEVEL 6 ARTILLERY RETAINERHorror, Voiceless Talker	EV 27Stamina 70	Immunity psionic 3
Speed 5 (flying, teleport)	Size 1M/Stability 2
Free Strike 6
Might 0	Agility +3	Reason +1	Intuition +2  Presence +1Psychic Erasure (Action) - 2d10 + highest characteristic - Signature
Keywords Ranged, Psionic, Strike
Distance Ranged 10	Target 1 creature or object
?	=11  7 psychic damage
? 12-16  12 psychic damage
?	17  15 psychic damage
Effect The exile is invisible to the target until the end of the target's next turn.Mindspace Jaunt (Maneuver, Encounter)
Keywords Area, Psionic
Distance 5 burst	Target Self and mentor
Effect The exile and their mentor turn invisible until the start of their next turn. While this invisibility lasts, the exile and their mentor take half damage from all attacks and their attacks do half damage to enemies.Psionic Conductor
When an ally within 5 of the exile uses an ability with the Psionic
keyword, they can do so as if they were in the exile's space.




WAR DOGS
Ajax's War Dogs-brutal patchwork soldiers-owe their new lives to the Iron Saint, and fight for him fanatically. War Dog minions are the freshest recruits, possessing minimal patchwork qualities and generally treated as disposable. Those who survive a battle are rewarded with gifts from the Body Banks. Those who don't survive become material for those Body Banks.
WITHDRAWN FROM THE BODY BANKS	
The Body Bank technology stolen from the upper worlds allows for the storage, manipulation, and reuse of biological body parts, and they have been put to terrible use by Ajax and his followers. For the rich and powerful elite, they serve as a source of reliable medical materials and even enhancements; for everyone else, they are a threat looming over them, a warning of what might happen to the disloyal. Those pieces not claimed by the upper classes are stitched, welded, and fused together to become an endless supply of twisted foot soldiers.
SPLINTERED SOULS

War dogs aren't technically soulless: they have minds, wills, and a vital spark that separates them from the Undead, but their souls are as patchwork as their bodies. Congealed unnaturally from the shattered remains of their constituent parts, their mosaic souls are irrevocably damaged and only partially functional. War dogs are thus metaphysically unstable, incapable of higher spiritual functions like empathy or love, and their personalities and beliefs are highly malleable. This makes them the ideal disposable soldier for the discerning tyrant.
ENLISTED AT REBIRTH	
From the moment they are reborn, every war dog is part of Ajax's war machine. Fresh recruits undergo inspections and tests to ensure their viability and assess their capabilities, and those who are found lacking are immediately recycled.
Those who meet the minimum requirements are sent to a brief but intense training camp, where they are drilled in basic combat, personal fitness, and unswerving loyalty. It is here that they are indoctrinated with Ajax's ideals, and any who question them are again, immediately recycled. Those who survive this training camp are fitted with "Loyalty Collars" - unremovable neck pieces fitted with explosive fuse-iron charges - and sent on to join a Legion.
CHAIN OF COMMAND	
Ajax leaves the management and tactical goals of individual legions to his hand-picked Strategoi. Each Strategos is an

exceptionally talented war dog, often a veteran with dozens of upgrades and refinements, and is usually selected for their ability to think and plan. The Strategos in turn appoints the most powerful and skilled war dogs in the Legion to their Inner Council.
Below the Inner Council are the hundreds of officers and thousands of soldiers. A single deviation from an order, no matter how rational or well-considered, can get a lowly soldier sent back to the Body Banks. Therefore, lower- ranking war dogs rarely alter tactics or show initiative.
Without an officer, war dogs turn into an unwieldy and stagnant force capable of only following their final orders.

WAR DOG LANGUAGES

Most war dogs speak Caelian and one Vaslorian human language.


WAR DOG MALICE	LEVEL 1+ MALICE FEATURESAt the start of any war dog's turn, you can spend malice to activate
one of the following features.Reconstitute ? 3 Malice
One war dog acting this turn tears apart a nearby corpse of a humanoid and incorporates its body parts into their own. The war dog regains Stamina equal to 5 times their level.Fire for Effect (Maneuver) ? 5 Malice
Keywords Area, Magic, Ranged
Distance 4 cube within 10	Target Each creature in the cube
Effect Each target makes an Agility test.
?	=11  5 fire damage; slowed or weakened (save ends)
? 12-16  5 fire damage; slowed or weakened (EoT)
?	17+  5 fire damageFodder Run ? 7 Malice
Each war dog minion can shift up their speed, make a free strike,
and then die.





































WAR DOG SHARPSHOOTER	LEVEL 1 MINION ARTILLERYHumanoid, War Dog	EV 6 for eight minionsStamina 3
Speed 7	Size 1M / Stability 0
With Captain Ranged distance +5	Free Strike 2
Might +0	Agility +2	Reason +0	Intuition +0  Presence +0Bolt Launcher (Action) ? 2d10 + 2 ? Signature
Keywords Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Ranged 5	Target One creature or object per minion
?	=11  2 damage
? 12-16  4 damage
?	17+  5 damage
Effect This ability ignores cover and concealment.Loyalty Collar
When the sharpshooter dies, they explode, dealing 1d6 damage to
each adjacent enemy.
	



WAR DOG GROUND COMMANDERLEVEL 3 LEADERHumanoid, War DogEV 20Stamina 120Speed 5Size 1M / Stability 2Free Strike 5Might +3	Agility +2Reason +3Intuition +2  Presence +2Conditioning Spear (Action) ? 2d10 + 3 ? Signature
Keywords Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1 or Ranged 5	Target Two creatures or objects
?	=11  8 damage; pull 1
? 12-16  12 damage; pull 2
?	17+  15 damage; pull 3
Effect One ally within 10 squares of the commander can make a free strike.
1 Malice A target who is adjacent to the ground commander after this ability is resolved is I<2 grabbed (save ends). This grab can't be escaped using the Escape Grab maneuver. The ground commander can grab up to two creatures at a time.Highest Posthumous Promotion (Maneuver)
Keywords Area, Magic
Distance 10 burst	Target Each war dog with a loyalty collar
Effect The ground commander selects any number of targets' loyalty collars and detonates them, killing the target instantly.Final Orders (Triggered Action)
Keywords Magic, Ranged
Distance Ranged 10	Target One ally
Trigger The target has a condition imposed on them, is force moved, or is killed.
Effect The target can move up to their speed and make a free strike before the triggering effect happens.End Effect
At the end of their turn, the ground commander can take 5 damage to end one save ends e?ect a?ecting them. This damage can't be reduced in any way.Loyalty Collar
When the ground commander dies, they explode, dealing 2d6 damage to each adjacent enemy.Combined Arms (Villain Action 1)
Keywords Area
Distance 10 burst	Target Each ally
Effect Each target can make a ranged free strike, then immediately use the Charge action.Make an Example of Them (Villain Action 2)
Keywords Magic, Ranged
Distance Ranged 10	Target One enemy
Effect Each ally within 5 squares of the target can move up to their speed and make a free strike against the target. The target is then I<2 frightened of the ground commander (save ends).Claim Them for the Body Banks (Villain Action 3)
Keywords Area, Magic
Distance 10 burst	Target Each ally
Effect Each target can shift 2 and use the Grab maneuver. For the rest of the encounter, each enemy has a bane on escaping
grabs.
WAR DOGS - 2ND ECHELON
The War Dogs, like any army, are outfitted to carry out warfare with weapons, armor, and no end of ghastly tools. But the War Dogs are no ordinary army, and they bear no ordinary equipment.
SHRIKEGUNS
The shrikegun is a new kind of weapon fit for a new kind of soldier. Each shrikegun is a rapid firing bolt-thrower that replaces the draw of a crossbow with the compact energy of torsion springs. When loosed, a standard shrikegun throws a five-inch, iron-tipped wooden stake hard enough to reliably pierce steel plate at 50 yards. The stabilization grooves cut into the stakes create a shrill whistle, leading to many less disciplined armies breaking upon hearing the "Shrike-scream" of a loosed volley.
FUSE-IRON	
Some War Dogs use fuse-iron weapons that emit flames or cause explosions. While the exact properties of fuse-iron depends on the alloy and shape, the material is known for turning physical force into heat and light. Special arrangements of fuse-iron utilize crush cavities, capable of creating concussive detonations that are incredibly powerful, if not particularly reliable. Fuse-iron is expensive, accident-prone, and almost impossible to work with in large amounts, so fuse-iron equipment is granted only to the army specialists.
HOUNDWEAPONS
Insubordinate War Dogs are usually punished with a trip back to the Body Banks, but individuals who need to be made an example of are relegated to an even harsher fate: becoming a Houndweapon. These living weapons are horrific blends of flesh, machine, and spirit created to be fantastically powerful and terribly cruel tools of war. Only the highest-ranking and most capable War Dogs may requisition a Houndweapon, given their power and the difficult and time-consuming process needed to make them.


	


	


WAR DOG TETRARCHLEVEL 6 LEADERHumanoid, War DogEV 32Stamina 180Speed 7Size 1M / Stability 2Free Strike 7Might +4	Agility +3Reason +2 Intuition +3  Presence +4Houndblade (Action) ? 2d10 + 4 ? Signature
Keywords Charge, Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon
Distance Melee 1 or Ranged 3	Target Two creatures or objects
?	=11  11 damage
? 12-16  16 damage; taunted (EoT)
?	17  19 damage; taunted (EoT)
Effect A creature taunted by this ability has a bane on strikes.
3 Malice Each target loses 1d3 Recoveries."Get them, you dolts!" (Maneuver) ? 1 Malice per target
Keywords -
Distance Ranged 10	Target Up to three creatures
Effect The target shifts up to their speed and makes a free strike. The target deals an additional 4 damage if they strike a taunted enemy.Sneering Disregard (Triggered Action)
Keywords -
Distance Self	Target Triggering creature
Trigger A non-taunted creature targets the tetrarch with a power roll.
Effect The tetrarch imposes a double bane on the power roll. If the target gets a tier-1 result, the tetrarch ignores any additional effects of the ability, and the target is frightened of the tetrarch (save ends).End Effect
At the end of their turn, the tetrarch can take 10 damage to end one save ends effect affecting them. This damage can't be reduced in any way.Chosen of the Iron Saint
The Director gains 1 malice whenever an ally within 10 of the tetrarch gets a tier-3 result on an attack.Enter the Fray (Villain Action 1) ? 2d10 + 4
Keywords Area
Distance 2 burst	Target All enemies
Effect The tetrarch leaps 7 squares before using this action.
?	=11  push 2; I<2 frightened (save ends)
? 12-16  push 4; I<3 frightened (save ends)
?	17  push 5; I<4 frightened (save ends)Lay Waste (Villain Action 2) ? 2d10 + 4
Keywords Area, Weapon
Distance Five 2 cubes within 20 Target All creatures and objects
?	=11  7 fire damage; A<2 slowed (EoT)
? 12-16  13 fire damage; A<3 slowed (save ends)
?	17  16 fire damage; A<4 slowed (save ends)
Effect The cubes are set ablaze. Until the end of the encounter, the affected area is considered difficult terrain, and a creature takes 2 fire damage for each affected square they enter."You Would Dare?!" (Villain Action 3)
Keywords -
Distance Self	Target Self
Effect Until the end of the encounter, the tetrarch rallies themself, gains damage immunity 2, and their signature action
now targets three creatures or objects.
WEREWOLF
When you see the blood in their eyes, the werewolf is already upon you.
Werewolves are shapeshifters filled with a need to rend and tear. They used to be ordinary humans, elves, polders, and the like. But when their feral compulsion takes control, they change into abominable beastmen and sometimes massive wolves.
HOWLING PRIMORDIAL CHAOS
Werewolves are swirling conductors of Primordial Chaos. Their bodies overflow with energy, almost painfully so. They shift and expand their forms into more beastlike shapes to best contain their power. And yet, one bite is all it takes for those ferocious forces to flow into its next host.
BROKERED OR CURSED
The curse of the werewolf is actively sought out by terrible nobles and rulers looking to extend their power and instill fear into their people. They secure deals with devils who can tap into the Primodial Chaos and unleash their beast, usually in exchange for relinquishing their legacy after they come to pass.
Laypeople don't have the luxury of a legacy, nor do they have councils that can help temper a werewolf. They know full well the horror of losing yourself to the beast and take action to rout out the threat of a werewolf among their own. Fear leaves them submissive to the demands of cursed kings, yet oppressive to their own accursed kin.
ON WIGHTS AND WERES
The powers that bore the werewolves were also harnessed and cultivated under the traditions of the stormwight furies. A werewolf's ferocity cannot overcome the stormwight's rage, nor can rage overpower ferocity. It's not uncommon for werewolves to subconsciously treat encounters with stormwight furies as if they were sport.
WEREWOLF LANGUAGES
Werewolves can speak any language they knew before they were cursed. The werewolves that have spent time researching their curse might also know Khamish, Anjali, or Khelt, depending on the source of their particular circumstances.

	

WYVERNS
Few dragons can match the fury of a wyvern. Their aggression is driven by hunting and territorial instinct. Many adventurers meet their end in the wyvern's maw- some because the wyvern saw them as competitors, and others because the wyvern was simply hungry.
Wyvern scales match the colors of the mud, rock, and rust that dominate the mountains and badlands where they prefer to reside. Unlike typical dragons, wyverns don't have front legs-instead, they walk like bats, propelled by their rear legs and balancing on the joints of their wings.
MOUNTAIN HUNTERS	
While on the hunt, wyverns perch on stone outcroppings and natural spires overlooking their territory. They first attack with their stinger, injecting prey with corrosive acid. If a wyvern's victim attempts to hide, the wyvern's hooked claws and fearsome teeth can tear open any crag or crevice in pursuit.
ACIDIC AGGRESSORS	
Without front limbs to grasp their prey, wyverns prefer to keep their distance and strike with their long, stinger- tipped tails. A single sting is usually enough to kill common game outright, and even larger foes are left wracked by pain. Wyverns have no interest in drawn-out struggle, and they relentlessly sting their foes at every opportunity.
PROTECTIVE PARENTS
A wyvern's infamous temper is easily provoked, particularly if their eggs or hatchlings are threatened. Many monster slayers for hire won't accept contracts to track and hunt wyverns during hatching season. Yet this season is when heroes are needed most, as mated pairs aggressively hunt anything or anyone to feed their young.
COMMUNICATING WITH WYVERNS
Wyverns are unable to speak. However, a clever hero carrying a feast of fresh meat might still be able to reason with one.

	

XORANNOX THE TYRACT
Xorannox the Tyract is an Overmind. Formally known by their endonym, vaurath (plural vaurathi), overminds plot and scheme against their chief rivals, the synlirii and the olothec, for control of the World Below.
PSIONIC EYES

An overmind is an enormous floating brain with a large central eye surrounded by many smaller embedded eyes. Even more alien, several psionic eyes float within inches of their head, each connected to a small brain that can manifest a unique psionic effect.
INTELLIGENT LOREMASTERS	
Like their rivals, overminds are loremasters of supreme intellect. They aren't usually wizards, but they all view the collection of knowledge and arcane sciences as the best tool for ultimate conquest. Overminds are cruel and capricious but enjoy tests of intellectual might. Their one vanity is their unshakable belief in their own intellectual superiority over all others.
OVERMIND LAIRS	
Thanks to their innate flight, overminds prefer to build (or rather, have their thralls build) towers with no doors or entrances anywhere near the bottom.
RIVALRIES AND NEGOTIATIONS	
Unlike their rivals, overminds have an intense hatred of their own kind and never work together. However, overminds often enjoy diplomacy with other species, seeking to form alliances and build secret networks of agents throughout the World Below.
SMELLY EGGS	
Overmind procreation involves one horror laying a single egg in a slime pool and leaving it behind. When another overmind later detects the distinct smell of the egg, they spray their inseminating fluid into the pool. These actions are compelled by biological necessity, a compulsion even the overminds can't ignore.
Unwitting explorers sometimes accidentally abscond with an egg. If unfertilized, its bearer is likely to attract the attention of other overminds and synlirii that use the eggs in genetic experiments to create psionic creatures. If fertilized, the explorer could find themselves as a newly hatched overmind's first victim.
XORANNOX THE TYRACT	
Xorannox (ZOR-ah-nocks) rules as Lord of the White Tower, a multi-level finger of alabaster stone. Commonly known as the Tyract - an ancient Za'hariax word that literally translates as "a king who rules with his teeth" - the overmind indeed consumes those who displease him.
Xorannox is chief of the Grasp, a secret organization that seeks to overthrow the voiceless talkers' great empire and place Xorannox above all, first as king, then as god.

The Tyract is a master strategist, always one step ahead of his enemies. Heroes may be surprised to discover their allies are members of the Grasp. When they meet Xorannox, he's delighted! He loves treating with humanoids! They have the same enemies, after all.
Unfortunately, no matter how useful or dependable a party of heroes might be, Xorannox is nearly incapable of resisting the urge to betray his allies. He assumes, as do most vaurathi, that the natural end of all alliances is betrayal. Thus when the gauntlet is thrown, and his life is in danger, the only minions he can truly trust are his own six eyes.
XORANNOX'S LANGUAGES

Overminds typically speak Za'hariax. Xorannox also speaks Caelian, Voll, and Hyrallic.


XORANNOX'S MALICE	MALICE FEATURESAt the start of Xorannox's turn, you can spend malice to activate one
of the following features.Gas Belch ? 3 Malice
Xorannox lets out a noxious belch. Each enemy within 2 of him is
M<3 weakened (save ends).Slime Trail ? 5 Malice
Until the end of Xorannox's next turn, whenever he or his eyes leave their space, they secrete a viscous slime into the squares on the ground. An enemy that enters an a?ected square has lightning weakness 5 and ?re weakness 5 until the end of the encounter.Mind Over Matter ? 7 Malice
Xorannox ?lls the encounter map with a powerful telekinetic ?eld. The Director chooses a cardinal direction (North, South, East, or West). A creature is a?ected by pull 2 in the chosen direction whenever they take a move action or are force moved. Each instance of this feature causes the previous instance to end. This
additional movement ignores stability.
	

	


DYNAMIC TERRAIN OBJECTS
A terrain object is an element placed in an encounter that alters the tactics of the battlefield, allowing the Director to better theme an encounter. They range from hazards that provide tempting targets for forced movement, to fieldworks and siege engines that provide a locational advantage, and arcane objects that an entire encounter can be built around.
EV
The encounter value cost of the terrain object. Some objects, particularly environmental hazards, are purchased in areas of terrain, such as 10x10. The hazard can be smaller than the indicated size.
STAMINA
Terrain objects either a single pool of Stamina or Stamina per square, depending on their size. If an object has Stamina per square it can be partially destroyed.
SIZE
Terrain objects either have a standard size (e.g. 1M) or squares of terrain or material. If an object has squares of terrain for size a creature can move through it but may trigger the object's effects. If an object lists squares of breakaway as part of size, those squares block movement and can be individually destroyed.
DIRECTION
Some terrain objects have a defined direction when placed, such as a front facing side for archer's stakes.
DISABLE
Most terrain objects can be disabled in the right circumstances. The Sabotage skill is generally applicable for tests made to disable most mechanisms and siege engines. Disabling an arcane object requires a more intricate process.
TRIGGER
Hazards and other terrain objects tied to terrain generally trigger when a creature moves onto their spaces. Unless otherwise noted, there is no limit to how often a terrain object can trigger.
EFFECT
This defines what happens with a terrain object is triggered.
UPGRADES
Some terrain objects can be upgraded for additional effects. If a terrain object has a size in squares the upgrade cost is paid on a square by square basis, unless otherwise noted.
HIDDEN OBJECTS
Some terrain objects are inherently hidden or can be hidden with an upgrade. Hidden objects can be found as part of the Search for Hidden Creatures maneuver. When you make an Intuition test assess these results:
* 11 or lower: You find all hidden objects within 1 square.
* 
12-16: You find all hidden objects within 5 squares.
* 17 or more: You find all hidden objects within 10 squares.

ALLIED AWARENESS
If a creature is aware of the terrain object in the encounter and prepared, they are treated as allies of the object and gain the allied awareness benefits, representing their familiarity and training with the object.
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS	
These represent natural elements that the defenders have channeled, cultivated, or otherwise placed to give them an edge in an encounter.

ANGRY BEEHIVE	LEVEL 2 HEXER HAZARDEV 2
A beehive full of angry bees that will swarm and attack with little provocationStamina: 3
Size: 1SDisable: Cannot be disabled, if the beehive is attacked or destroyed, it will unleash the swarm of bees.Trigger: A creature moves into the hive or an adjacent square without shifting.
Effect: The hive is removed and a swarm is placed on the square of the triggering creature. Any creature who begins their turn in the same space as the swarm takes 3 poison damage. At the start of each round, the swarm spreads to a random adjacent square preferring squares that contain a creature. After 3 rounds the swarm dissipates.Upgrades: angry beehive can be upgraded in the following ways.
* Concealed Hive (+1 EV): The hive is hidden until the swarm is unleashed.
* Killer Bees (+2 EV): The bees are a particularly aggressive and dangerous species. The hive triggers even if a creature shifts adjacent to the hive. The swarm also deals +1D6 poison
damage.
BRAMBLES	LEVEL 1 DEFENDER FORTIFICATIONEV 1 / 1010 thicket
A thicket of vines with sharp thornsStamina: 3/square
Size: 1 or more squares of difficult terrainDisable: Only through destruction of each square of brambles.Trigger: A creature moves into a brambles square without shifting.
Effect: The triggering creature takes 1 damage per square of brambles they move through.Upgrade - Poisonous Thorns (+1 EV): The brambles are poisonous. A creature who takes damage from a square gains
bleeding (save ends).
	

FIELDWORKS	
These represent temporary field fortifications that give the defenders an edge in an encounter.


	

	

MECHANISMS
These represent more intricate construction projects that can impact the battlefield.
Mechanisms need to be linked to another triggering mechanism for activation. Some creatures have the ability to trigger mechanisms on their turn.

COLUMN OF BLADES	LEVEL 3 DEFENDER FORTIFICATIONEV 3
A spinning wooden column affixed with sharp bladesStamina: 5
Size: 1LDisable: Direct damage only.Trigger: A creature enters a square adjacent to the column of blades.
Effect: The triggering creature suffers the Spinning Blades ability.Spinning Blades (Triggered) ? 2D10 + 2
Keywords: Weapon, Strike	Target: 1 creature or object
Distance: Melee
?	=11  4 damage
? 12-16  6 damage; M<2 bleeding (save ends)
?	17  9 damage; M<3 bleeding (save ends)Upgrades: Column of Blades can be upgraded in the following ways.
* Stone Column (+1EV): Upgrade the column to stone. Increase the Stamina to 8.
* Metal Column (+1EV): Upgrade the column to metal. Increase the stamina to 11.
* Concealed (+1 EV): The column is motionless and the blades are concealed inside of the column until it is triggered at which point it becomes revealed.
* Spiked Flails (+4 EV): Instead of blades the column is affixed with heavy spiked balls attached to it by chains. The fortification triggers against any creatures that enter a square up to 2 squares from it and inflicts Whirling Flails instead of Spinning Blades.Whirling Flails (Triggered) ? 2D10 + 2
Keywords: Weapon, Strike	Target: 1 creature or object
Distance: Melee
?	=11  5 damage
? 12-16  8 damage; M<2 daze (save ends)
?	17  11 damage; M<3 daze (save ends)Allied Awareness
Allies of this object can shift through triggering squares and avoid the fortification's effects. A creature observing this can make a Hard Intuition test and try to shift through triggering squares. On a success they avoid the fortification's effects. On a failure they suffer the ability. On a failure with a consequence they suffer the
ability with an edge.
	

	

SIEGE ENGINES	
These are powerful weapons that require a team of creatures to operate or move. Siege weapons can scale in size from smaller field weapons up to large mechanisms that can destroy buildings.
ADJACENT CREATURE ACTIONS
Many siege engines do not take actions on their own. Instead, an adjacent creature can use their action to activate a siege engine ability. Some siege weapons must be reloaded as an adjacent creature action before it can use an ability again. Others can benefit from other adjacent creature actions, such as spot and move.
An allied squad of creatures can split their squad action and coordinate multiple adjacent creature actions.

ARROW LAUNCHER	LEVEL 2 ARTILLERY SIEGE ENGINEEV 8
A small wooden cart that uses rockets to launch up to 100 arrows at one time. While it is inaccurate it makes up for it by spreading a large volume of projectiles over a wide area.Size: 1L
Stamina: 30Disable: Make a medium Agility test when you are adjacent to the object. On a success the object is jammed and will not trigger when a creature steps on it. Failure with a consequence means the object attacks you, if it is loaded. Success with a consequence means the object is disabled, but you are slowed (EoT).       Arrow Storm (Adjacent Creature Action) ? 2D10 Keywords: Area, Weapon	Target: All creatures and objects Distance: 5 cube within 20
?	=11  5 damage
? 12-16  8 damage
?	17  11 damage
Effect: Arrow Storm cannot be used again until the object is reloaded.Reload (Adjacent Creature Action)
Keywords: --	Target: this object
Distance: Melee 1
Effect: The object is reloaded, allowing Arrow Storm to be used again.Spot (Adjacent Creature Action)
Keywords: --	Target: this object
Distance: Melee 1
Effect: The next use of Arrow Storm has an edge and +10 rangeMove (Adjacent Creature Action)
Keywords: --	Target: this object
Distance: Melee 1
Effect: This object moves 3 and the adjacent creature using their action moves 3 as long as they end their move adjacent to this object.Upgrades: An arrow launcher can be upgraded in the following ways:
* Flaming arrows (+1 EV): The arrows now deal fire damage and will ignite flammable objects in the area of effect.
	



	
ARCANE OBJECTS
More powerful and esoteric objects that can be the center of an encounter.

THE BLACK OBELISK	LEVEL 3 RELIC, CONTROLLEREV 20
A foreboding black obelisk that knows more about you than you would like.Stamina: 100
Size: 2Disable: Make a hard Reason test when you are adjacent to the object. Magic will generally apply. On a success the object is disabled for the rest of the encounter. Failure with a consequence means you immediately trigger Your Fears Become Manifest with a bane. Success with a consequence means the object is disabled, but you are slowed (save ends).Trigger: A round begins
Effect: Each enemy within 10 of the Black Obelisk suffers the Your Fears Become Manifest ability      Your Fears Become Manifest (Triggered) ? 2D10 + 2 Keywords: Area, Magic, Object	Target: All enemies Distance: Burst 10
?	=11  P<1 slowed (EoT)
? 12-16  P<2 slowed (EoT), weakened (EoT)
?	17 P<3 slowed (EoT), weakened (EoT), frightened (EoT) Effect: The target is pushed 2.



INCUBATOR OF A'AN	
A shard of the formerly dead Sun God A'An is incubating inside of your body, guiding you so she can be resurrected to her true glory by earning 100 followers.
Benefit: You gain all the Sun domain abilities as if you were a conduit of your level. You gain fire immunity 5. If you succeed in resurrecting A'An you will become a Saint of A'An.
Drawback: You gain cold weakness 5. When a respite ends, and you have not recruited a new follower of A'An, make a hard Presence test. On a failure you lose a Recovery. On a failure with a consequence A'An possesses your body until your next respite. You now must roleplay A'An trapped in your form, prioritizing earning new followers.

POWER FIXTURES	
The more of these objects that stay on the field, the worse the situation will get for the invaders. Power fixtures are especially potent fortifications for solo creatures and smaller strike forces.

PSIONIC SHARD	LEVEL 5 DEFENDER FORTIFICATIONEV 7
A massive crystal that hums and makes the air feel thick.Stamina: 40
Size: 2Disable: Direct damage only.Trigger: The shard is destroyed
Effect: The shard releases a shockwave that briefly tightens the barrier around each creature affected by Psionic Barrier, inflicting dazed (EoT).Psionic Barrier
While at least one psionic shard is intact, the damage dealt to
each ally creature is halved.
HOLY IDOL	LEVEL 5 SUPPORT RELICEV 7
An empowering monument to the higher power that enables the villain's machinations.Stamina: 35
Size: 2Disable: Direct damage only.Empowered Will
At the start of each round while the holy idol is intact, the Director gains a d6 that lasts until the end of the round. When an ally creature deals or takes damage, the Director can roll the d6 to increase the damage the creature deals or reduce the damage the creature takes by an amount equal to the result (to a minimum of
2). Only one d6 can be applied to any one instance of damage.
TREE OF MIGHT	LEVEL 5 HEXER HAZARDEV 14
A gnarled tree with unearthed roots that writhe and curl.Stamina: 60
Size: 3
Immunity: 5 all non-fire or corruption damageDisable: Direct damage only.Tree's Nourishment
At the start of each round while at least one tree of might is intact, each enemy touching the ground takes M<0 10 corruption damage and the tree of might grows a fruit. The potency increases by 1 each subsequent round.Mighty Fruit
Once per round, an adjacent creature can take some fruit from the tree of might and eat it as a free action. The creature gains 10 temporary Stamina and has their Might score increased by 1 (to a
maximum of 6) until the end of the encounter.
